This Is What Happens After a Neighborhood Gets Gentrified

The Atlantic

Richard Florida

Back in 2014, Spike Lee famously expressed his disdain for the forces of gentrification in New York: “Why does it take an influx of white New Yorkers in the south Bronx, in Harlem, in Bed Stuy, in Crown Heights for the facilities to get better?” he argued. “What about the people who are renting? They can’t afford it anymore!” Lee’s criticisms reflect a now-familiar narrative in cities all over the U.S.: As wealthier residents flow back into once-low-income, often minority neighborhoods, longtime residents can be priced out.

But exactly how does this dynamic play out, and is displacement inevitable? A new comprehensive review of what we know about gentrification sheds much-needed light on this heated issue. The review, by researchers at the University of California Berkeley and UCLA and published by the Federal Reserve of San Francisco, takes a close look at studies of gentrification and displacement conducted over the past several decades. (I wrote about the review’s insights on how public investment shapes gentrification last week). It helps us better understand several questions related to gentrification and displacement: Just how extensive is displacement, exactly what kinds of people are displaced, and how do people and groups fare after they leave gentrifying neighborhoods?

The earliest studies of displacement conducted in the 1980s generated widely varying estimates of how many people are displaced by gentrification. A 1982 study found that roughly 1 percent of all Americans, 5 percent of families, and 8.5 percent of urban families were displaced from their homes between 1970 and 1977 by either eviction, public action, sale or reoccupation, or the changing state of their neighborhood. A 1983 study of five cities (Boston, Cincinnati, Richmond, Seattle, and Denver) found that nearly a quarter (23 percent) of residents in these urban neighborhoods were displaced due to eviction, increased rent, or the fact that the house they were renting was sold between 1978 and 1980. Similarly, a 2001 study of gentrifying areas of Boston by Jacob Vigdor found evidence of heightened housing turnover in gentrifying neighborhoods.

Perhaps the foremost student of gentrification and displacement is Lance Freeman of Columbia University. His 2004 study with Frank Braconi found that poor households in gentrifying neighborhoods of New York City were less likely to move than poor households in non-gentrifying neighborhoods. This of course may have to do with the fact that there are fewer poor households in gentrifying neighborhoods to begin with. Still, the authors concluded that “a neighborhood could go from a 30% poverty population to 12% in as few as 10 years without any displacement whatsoever.” In a subsequent 2005 study, Freeman found that the probability that a household would be displaced in a gentrifying neighborhood was a mere 1.3 percent. A follow-up 2007 study, again with Braconi, examined apartment turnover in New York City neighborhoods and found that the probability of displacement declined as the rate of rent inflation increased in a neighborhood. Disadvantaged households in gentrifying neighborhoods were actually 15 percent less likely to move than those in non-gentrifying households.

And, in a 2009 study, Freeman found that gentrifying neighborhoods are becoming more racially diverse by tracking neighborhood change from 1970 to 2000 (although he does note that cities overall are becoming more diverse as well). Freeman also discovered that changes in educational diversity were the same for both gentrifying and non-gentrifying areas. Ultimately, while some residents were displaced from 1970 to 2000, gentrifying neighborhoods were generally more diverse when it came to income, race, and education as opposed to non-gentrifying neighborhoods.

Counterintuitively, several studies have even found that gentrification can in some cases reduce displacement. Neighborhood improvements like bars, restaurants, waterfronts, or extended transit can and sometimes do encourage less advantaged households to stay put in the face of gentrification. A 2006 study found that displacement accounted for only 6 to 10 percent of all moves in New York City due to housing expenses, landlord harassment, or displacement by private action (e.g. condo conversion) between 1989 and 2002. A 2011 study concluded that neighborhood income gains did not significantly predict household exit rates. What did predict out-migration was age, minority status, selective entry and exit, and renting as opposed to buying.

A 2010 study on “Who Gentrifies Low-Income Neighborhoods” found that the impact of gentrification on black residents varies based on level of education. By examining around 15,000 census tracts in 64 metros from 1990 to 2000, the authors found that gentrification tends to benefit highly educated black households. In fact, one-third of the increase in income among gentrifying neighborhoods during this period came from the progress of this specific demographic. This in turn causes gentrifying neighborhoods to be more attractive to middle-class black households. But gentrification can also have a negative effect on less educated black households, by pushing those who did not complete high school out of gentrifying neighborhoods.

That said, displacement can be and is a big issue in places where gentrification is occurring at a feverish pace. In her coverage of related research by the UC Berkeley Urban Displacement Project, my CityLab colleague Tanvi Misra points to the strong link between gentrification and displacement in a high-gentrification city like San Francisco. Over a quarter of San Francisco’s neighborhoods (422 of the nearly 1,600 surveyed) are at risk of displacement. The study’s lead author, Karen Chapple, writes that by 2030, San Francisco, Oakland, “and many other Bay Area communities may realize that their neighborhood has turned the corner from displacement risk to reality.”

Indeed, displacement is becoming a larger issue in knowledge hubs and superstar cities, where the pressure for urban living is accelerating. These particular cities attract new businesses, highly skilled workers, major developers, and large corporations, all of which drive up both the demand for and cost of housing. As a result, local residents—and neighborhood renters in particular—may feel pressured to move to more affordable locations.

A temporary wall in front of row houses in the Harlem neighborhood of New York City. (Chris Hondros AFP/Getty)
A 2013 Cleveland Fed study found that extensive gentrification is the province of a limited group of large superstar cities and knowledge hubs like New York, San Francisco, Seattle, Boston, and Washington D.C. In three-quarters of America’s 55 largest cities, less than 10 percent of all neighborhoods experienced gentrification from 2000 to 2007, and gentrification affected 5 percent or less of a total of 22 neighborhoods. Not surprisingly, these cities are the ones being hit hardest by displacement. And with real estate prices in these cities surging toward all-time highs, there is reason to believe that displacement may worsen over time.

Of course, an even bigger issue is the neighborhoods that are untouched by gentrification and where concentrated poverty persists and deepens. A 2014 study found that for every gentrified neighborhood across 51 U.S. metro areas, 10 others remained poor and 12 formerly stable neighborhoods fell into concentrated disadvantage. A Harvard study of Chicago found that the gentrification process continues for neighborhoods with over 35 percent of white residents, and either slows or stops if the neighborhood is 40 percent black. The reality is that the displaced are getting pushed out of working-class neighborhoods that are “good enough” to attract people and investment, while the poorest and most vulnerable neighborhoods remain mired in persistent poverty and concentrated disadvantage.


Gentrification and displacement, then, are symptoms of the scarcity of quality urbanism. The driving force behind both is the far larger process of spiky reurbanization—itself propelled by large-scale public and private investment in everything from transit, schools, and parks to private research institutions and housing redevelopment.

All of which points to the biggest, most crucial task ahead: creating more inclusive cities and neighborhoods that can meet the needs of all urbanites.

---

The Myth of Gentrification

Slate

John Buntin

It started in Soho, then moved to Chelsea and the East Village. Riots in Tompkins Square in 1988 earned it some headlines but didn’t stop its creeping advance. It moved on to lower Harlem, then jumped the river to Park Slope. Williamsburg and Fort Greene followed; today, it threatens even Bedford-Stuyvesant. New York isn’t the only city where it spreads. San Francisco, Washington, and Boston have arguably been even more affected by it. Seattle, Atlanta, and Chicago have experienced it on a large scale, too.

The “it,” as you may have guessed, is gentrification. If you live in one of these cities, you probably think you know how it works. Artists, bohemians, and gay couples come first. They move into run-down—but charming and historic—homes and loft spaces close to the urban core. Houses are restored. Funky coffee shops appear. Public safety improves. Then rents and home prices start to go up. The open-minded, diversity-loving creative types who were the first wave of gentrifiers give way to lawyers, bankers, and techies. As rents and home prices continue to rise, the earlier residents—often lower-income people of color—are forced out.

That’s the story, at least. Read the Atlantic’s City Lab, and you regularly encounter titles such as “Why Gentrification Is So Hard to Stop” and “There’s Basically No Way Not to Be a Gentrifier.” Liberals and conservatives alike agree that it is bad (although liberals blame developers, and conservatives blame onerous regulations that limit development). Even Jezebel has joined in. It recently chided Taylor Swift (who earlier this year traded her comparatively affordable $2 million apartment in Nashville for a $20 million penthouse in Tribeca) for including an “obtuse” “gentrification anthem” in her latest album.

Economists found no evidence that poor people moved out of gentrifying neighborhoods at a higher than normal rate.

That gentrification displaces poor people of color by well-off white people is a claim so commonplace that most people accept it as a widespread fact of urban life. It’s not. Gentrification of this sort is actually exceedingly rare. The socio-economic status of most neighborhoods is strikingly stable over time. When the ethnic compositions of low-income black neighborhoods do change, it’s typically because Latinos and other immigrants move into a neighborhood—and such in-migration is probably more beneficial than harmful. As for displacement—the most objectionable feature of gentrification—there’s actually very little evidence it happens. In fact, so-called gentrifying neighborhoods appear to experience less displacement than nongentrifying neighborhoods.

It’s time to retire the term gentrification altogether. Fourteen years ago, Maureen Kennedy and Paul Leonard of the Brookings Institution wrote that gentrification “is a politically loaded concept that generally has not been useful in resolving growth and community change debates because its meaning is unclear.” That’s even truer today. Some U.S. cities do have serious affordability problems, but they’re not the problems critics of gentrification think they are. Worse, the media focus on gentrification has obscured problems that actually are serious: the increasing isolation of poor, minority neighborhoods and the startling spread of extreme poverty.

* * *

Gentrification, as it is commonly understood, is about more than rising housing prices. It’s about neighborhoods changing from lower-income, predominantly black or Latino neighborhoods to high-income, predominantly white neighborhoods. Demographers and sociologists have identified neighborhoods where this kind of displacement has occurred. Wicker Park in Chicago, Harlem and Chelsea in Manhattan, Williamsburg in Brooklyn—these places really did gentrify. Sociologists and demographers captured these changes in case studies and ethnographies. But starting a decade ago, economists began to ask more nuanced questions about the displacement the other social sciences were documenting. Simply documenting that low-income people were being forced out of a neighborhood whose housing prices were rising didn’t mean in and of itself that gentrification was causing displacement, they noted. Poor people often move away from nongentrifying neighborhoods, too. Indeed, low-income people move frequently for a variety of reasons. The real question was whether low-income residents moved away from “gentrifying” neighborhoods at a higher rate than they did from nongentrifying neighborhoods.

Fans watch as Solange performs during the 2013 Northside Festival at McCarren Park.

One of the first people to explore this question in a sophisticated way was University of Washington economist Jacob Vigdor. In 2002, Vigdor examined what had happened in Boston between 1974 and 1997, a period of supposedly intense gentrification. But Vigdor found no evidence that poor people moved out of gentrifying neighborhoods at a higher than normal rate. In fact, rates of departure from gentrifying neighborhoods were actually lower.

It wasn’t just Boston. In 2004, Columbia University economists Lance Freeman and Frank Braconi conducted a similar study of gentrification in New York City in the 1990s. They too found that low-income residents of “gentrifying” neighborhoods were less likely to move out of the neighborhood than low-income residents of neighborhoods that had none of the typical hallmarks of gentrification.

Of course, displacement is not the only way in which gentrification could harm the poor. Residents of gentrifying neighborhoods might stay put but suffer from rising rents. Freeman and Braconi found that rents did rise in gentrifying neighborhoods in New York. But rising rents had an unexpected effect: As rents rose, residents moved less.


 “The most plausible interpretation,” the authors concluded, “may be the simplest: As neighborhoods gentrify, they also improve in many ways that may be as appreciated by their disadvantaged residents as by their more affluent ones.”

In 2010, University of Colorado–Boulder economist Terra McKinnish, along with Randall Walsh and Kirk White, examined gentrification across the nation as a whole over the course of the 1990s. McKinnish and her colleagues found that gentrification created neighborhoods that were attractive to minority households, particularly households with children or elderly homeowners. They found no evidence of displacement or harm. While most of the income gains in these neighborhoods went to white college graduates under the age of 40 (the archetypical gentrifiers), black high school graduates also saw their incomes rise. They also were more likely to stay put. In short, black households with high school degrees seemed to benefit from gentrification.

A man walks in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, in September 2010.

McKinnish, White, and Walsh aren’t the only researchers whose work suggests that blacks often benefit from gentrification. In his book, Stuck in Place: Urban Neighborhoods and the End of Progress Toward Racial Equality, sociologist Patrick Sharkey took a close look at black neighborhoods that saw significant changes to their ethnic composition between 1970 and 1990. He found that when the composition of black neighborhoods changed, it wasn’t because whites moved in. That rarely happens. For black communities, neighborhood change happens when Latinos begin to arrive. Sometimes these changes can be difficult, resulting as they often do in new political leaders and changes to the character of the communities. But Sharkey’s research suggests they also bring real benefits. Black residents, particularly black youth, living in more diverse neighborhoods find significantly better jobs than peers with the same skill sets who live in less diverse neighborhoods. In short, writes Sharkey, “There is strong evidence that when neighborhood disadvantage declines, the economic fortunes of black youth improve, and improve rather substantially.”

In other words, the problem isn’t so much that gentrification hurts black neighborhoods; it’s that it too often bypasses them. Harvard sociologists Robert Sampson and Jackelyn Hwang have shown that neighborhoods that are more than 40 percent black gentrify much more slowly than other neighborhoods. The apparent unwillingness of other ethnic groups to move into and invest in predominantly black communities in turn perpetuates segregation and inequality in American society.

The problem isn’t so much that gentrification hurts black neighborhoods; it’s that it too often bypasses them.

While critics of gentrification decry a process that is largely imaginary, they’ve missed a far more serious problem—the spread of extreme poverty. Last year, economists Joseph Cortright of the Portland, Oregon–based Impresa Consulting and Dillon Mahmoudi of Portland State University set out to examine how America’s poorest urban neighborhoods had changed over time. They started by going back to 1970 and identifying 1,100 census tracts—the county subregions that demographers use as a basic unit of analysis—located within 10 miles of the central business districts in the 51 largest cities with high levels of poverty. They then asked a simple question: How did the socio-economic status of these places change during the next 40 years?

The answer: Most had not. Two-thirds of high-poverty neighborhoods in 1970 were still high-poverty neighborhoods in 2010. Only about 100 neighborhoods saw their poverty rates decline to below the national average. The typical metropolitan area had one or two high-poverty neighborhoods that could conceivably be described as gentrifying. However, Cortright and Mahmoudi did find another, more significant change. Whereas in 1970, 1,100 census tracts within 10 miles of central business districts had poverty rates of 30 percent or higher, by 2010, the number of poor census tracts had jumped to 3,100. In other words, the number of high-poverty areas close to central business districts had nearly tripled. To make matters worse, the number of people living in extreme poverty in those areas had doubled. The residents of these neighborhoods are disproportionately black.

* * *

If gentrification occurs so infrequently—and if it may help rather than hurt existing residents—why are so many people so upset about it? There are at least a couple of reasons. The first has to do with where it happens. According to Cortright and Mahmoudi, just three cities—New York, Chicago, and Washington—accounted for one-third of all census tracts that saw poverty rates decline from above 30 percent in 1970 to below 15 percent in 2010. Half of all the areas in the nation that “gentrified” (if we still want to call it that) were located in those three cities. No wonder New Yorkers and Washingtonians think gentrification is a big deal.

People at a park in Brooklyn during the summer of 2011.

The other reason we continue to talk about gentrification probably has more to do with middle-class fears. Housing prices in America’s most expensive coastal cities have risen sharply since the end of the Great Depression. Expressing concern about “gentrification” in those cities may simply be another way of expressing concern about rising housing prices. But in fact, different types of cities have very different kinds of affordability problems. In coastal cities, the cost of housing is often far higher than the cost of construction. That is primarily because supply is constrained. Builders in Washington can’t turn Adams Morgan’s row houses into a high-rise apartment district, so row house prices rise. High demand plays a role too, of course. Some of that demand reflects a preference for older, close-in housing stock. The fact that global cities deliver high wages to the most skilled workers is almost certainly more important though. Gentrification isn’t the cause of these cities’ affordable housing problem. It’s a symptom.

There’s a large group of cities with a very different affordability problem. These are Rust Belt cities such as Detroit where housing sells at or below the cost of construction. These are cities with an income problem. Cities where the cost of housing is far higher than the cost of construction require different policy solutions than cities where the situation is reversed. Coastal cities can benefit from requirements that developers set aside a portion of new units as affordable housing, although some economists argue that such zoning requirements can actually backfire by raising the cost of new housing even more, and all agree that the effect of such set-asides will be minimal. It certainly won’t reverse the transformation of these cities into enclaves for the rich.
---

Doing Something Real About Gentrification and Displacement

The Stanger

Dan Savage

The only thing worse than listening to suburbanites bitch about being stuck in traffic? Listening to local politicians pretend they can actually do something to Make Commutes Great Fast Again.

Way, way back in the '50s and '60s, people got it into their heads that they had a constitutional right to live in the suburbs and drive in or through the center of a city—to jobs, to stores, to stadiums, to hookers, to suburbs on the other side of the city—going seventy miles an hour. Our local politicians can't bring themselves to tell these entitled shits the truth: It's never going to be the 1960s around here again, when expressways were expressways, not parking lots. We can't build our way out of this. We can only build alternatives to cars, aka mass transit. (Preferably rapid transit, which is grade-separated transit. Without taking lanes away from cars, which we aren't going to do, BRT is not rapid transit. It's an oxymoron.) Mayors and city council members and county council members in cities with with functioning mass transit systems don't have to make serious faces and reassure entitled drivers that they're gonna do something to speed up their commutes.

This is how a conversation between an elected official and an entitled suburbanite might go in New York or Chicago:

"My commute is awful! I sit in traffic for hours!"

"Then take the train."

"I don't want take the train."

"Then sit in traffic, asshole."

Sit in traffic or take rapid transit: those are your options, when you live, work, or play in or near a big, thriving urban center with a functional rapid transit system. New York, Chicago, Portland, D.C., London, Paris, Vienna. Complain about your commute and you'll be told to pick one: traffic (that you and your car help create) or transit (that you and your taxes help subsidize). Politicians in cities with functional (that's functional, not perfect) mass transit systems—where they still spend a lot of money maintaining roads—don't have to waste billions of dollars on bullshit tunnels supposedly designed to "preserve capacity" but really intended to assuage the irrational anger of entitled drivers whose votes they need.

And now, a song...


Urbanites complaining about gentrification have a lot in common with suburbanites complaining about commutes.

Backing way the hell up: At roughly same time suburbanites got it into their heads that they're entitled to drive through the center of the city at 70 MPH, urbanites got it into their heads that the center of the city is cheapest place to live. ("Downtown, where the folks are broke!") And for a while the center of the city was the cheapest place to live. But that's no longer the case. Before we get to why downtown and inner-city neighborhoods are no longer the cheapest places to live, let's pause to reflect on what made them the cheapest place to live for a good/depressing chunk of the 20th Century.

Downtown, the city center, close-in neighborhoods—for decades residential and commercial rents were low and you could find a giant loft space where you could make art (or drink about making art) or a cheap storefront where you could start a theater or a bar or a cult. But this was an historical anomaly driven by two things lefties hate: racism and the automobile. Shitty people abandoned the city: racist whites fled the city and expressways and cars made it possible for urbanophobes to exploit everything a city had to offer without having to actually live (and pay taxes) in the city. Once upon a time urbanites regarded this as a crisis. Today we rarely acknowledge the two social forces that made city centers the most affordable places to live: the evils of racism and the catastrophe of the automobile—hate, fear, and the internal combustion engine.

That was then. This is now:

We are in the middle of a once in a lifetime tectonic shift in consumer preferences regarding urban living. Throughout much of the 20th century, American households reported a preference for suburban living. Not everyone was able to afford to move to the suburbs (and many were racially excluded) but even central city residents commonly told survey researchers that they would rather be living in the suburbs. The result was that, as people sorted within regions, the people with the most economic (and racial) power chose the most desirable locations (at the edges) while the less powerful were left with the less desirable center. There has been a shift, and now a growing share of the powerful prefer the center.

People are choosing to move back into the city. We can't build a wall around our city, we can't keep people out, and we haven't built enough housing to accommodate demand. Scarcity is driving up the value of the housing stock that already exists and people are being priced out and displaced:

The population of a region is largely determined by the number of jobs available. When we add jobs, we create new demand for housing. If we build housing at the same rate that we create jobs, housing prices remain relatively constant. When we occasionally build more housing than we need, prices fall, and when we build too little housing, prices rise. Across the country we have been systematically building too little housing for a very long time now and high housing prices and rents are the utterly predictable result.

1495470672_tmp_displacementisreal.jpg
Housing scarcity—exacerbated by the ridiculous amount of this city zoned for single-family housing—deserves as much blame for the displacement crisis as gentrification. More. And unlike gentrification ("a once in a lifetime tectonic shift in consumer preferences"), scarcity and single-family zoning are two things we can actually do something about. Rezone huge swaths of the city. Build more units of affordable housing, borrow the social housing model discussed in the Rick Jacobus' piece I quote from above ("Why We Must Build"), do away with parking requirements, and—yes—let developers develop. (This is the point where someone jumps into comments to point out that I live in a big house on Capitol Hill. It's true! And my house is worth a lot of money—a lot more than what we paid for it a dozen years ago. But the value of my house is tied to its scarcity. Want to cut the value of my property in half? Great! Join me in calling for a radical rezone of all of Capitol Hill—every single block—for multi-family housing, apartment blocks and towers. That'll show me!)

We're electing a new mayor and a few new city and county council members this fall. So we're gonna be hearing from politicians pretending they can do something about something they can't really do anything about. (The pandering has already begun.) Like politicians telling suburbanites they're gonna do something to shorten their commutes, they're telling urbanites they're gonna do something to halt gentrification. Not because they can, but because they need the votes of people who are angry about gentrification and displacement. (In some cases angry and complicit. If I meet one more anti-gentrification activist who moved to Seattle ten minutes ago, I shall scream.)

I'm going to contradict myself now because what are the odds anyone is still reading this screed?

There actually is something we can do about gentrification and displacement. We can't stop it. Snark can't halt tectonic shifts. The thing we can do? It's the same thing we can do about about traffic: build a truly regional, truly rapid transit system. A comprehensive regional rapid transit system will make displacement—being forced to move from one neighborhood to another by economic forces beyond the control of our local elected officials—less devastating and less isolating for those who will inevitably be impacted.

Enough with the snarky posters, enough with the inane, masturbatory, self-congratulatory stunts, enough with the attacks on a single pot shop. Let's stop wasting time and political energy demanding something that local elected officials can't do—stop gentrification—and instead demand some things they can do, things that would actually mitigate some of the harms of gentrification and displacement. Things like...

• Build out our fixed-rail rapid transit system as quickly as possible. We've just passed ST3. More fixed-rail, rapid-transit lines are coming. But it's going to take 20+ years to build out and it looks like we're going to have to fight a never-ending rearguard action to protect the plan we approved. (How dare these assholes call themselves Democrats.) Fast-track whatever can be fast-tracked.

• Immediately create true BRT lines along the coming light rail lines and beyond—and take roads away from cars to do it. Reserve those routes for buses. Will that make driving through the city harder? Sure it will. And good. Drivers will want light rail completed just as quickly as rail commuters and it'll create an incentive for drivers to leave their cars at home and take the bus instead. And people who've been forced out of the center of the city and into the suburbs won't have to wait 20 years or longer for rapid transit to reach them.

• Massive subsidies for riders of mass transit. Demand an annual pass that costs $365 dollars for unlimited rides. And a $40 monthly pass. As more people are pushed out of the center of the city by changing preferences/tectonic shifts, more people will be relying on transit to get to jobs, schools, doctors, recreation, etc. Subsidize transit to bring down the costs of commuting for all. A citation for "karmic infraction" may put a smile on the face someone being displaced—or on the face of the person who displaced them—but cheaper, subsidized transit would actually do something much useful: it would put money in displaced people's pockets—the pockets of people who have already been displaced—and help them get where they need to go.

People are choosing to move back into the cities. We can't restrict free choice, freedom of movement, build a wall around the city, or declare certain sections of the city off-limits to newcomers. We can build more units of affordable housing (which we're doing), adopt that social housing model Jacobus writes about (which sounds like what Capitol Hill Housing already does, but let's scale it way the fuck up), and we should take steps to prevent the housing market from being distorted by speculators and people parking their money in real estate (which they're doing in Vancouver and we need to do here). But there's only so much we can do. People are going to be displaced. We can shake our fists and put up posters—and refuse to make any actionable demands—but that's not going to change anything or help anyone. Snark and pranks masquerading as activism aren't going stop people from moving back into the cities. It's time to do something that might actually make a difference.

Traffic and displacement—two different, if intertwined problems. One solution: rapid transit.

---

The gentrification of death: in New York eternal rest will soon be a luxury
For two centuries, New York’s cemeteries have promised a peaceful and picturesque hereafter. But space is now scarce – and increasingly expensive.
The Guardian

Devin Kelly
n 1825, Jacob Bigelow, a doctor and botanist in Boston, Massachusetts, noticed that the many small church graveyards throughout the city were becoming overcrowded. A prescient man, Bigelow concocted a plan for a new cemetery on the outskirts of the city; one carpeted in flowers and designed to preserve natural beauty. After years of planning and lobbying wary townspeople, Mount Auburn Cemetery was founded in 1831, and Boston’s mourners began packing picnic baskets and taking carriages out to the country to be with their recently deceased.

Trees tower and curve and throw long spiralling shadows over tombs and headstones. It is redolent of wealth
Though Mount Auburn owed a debt to European cemeteries built with similar intent, it was the first of its kind in the US, and soon a rural and garden cemetery movement took hold. Green-Wood Cemetery was founded in New York City in 1838, and in 1847, New York state passed the Rural Cemetery Act, which allowed churches and other entities to buy up tax-exempt land. Soon, New York City – and Queens especially, where more than double the number of people who live above ground are buried below it – was home to many sprawling cemeteries. The Evergreens. Cypress Hills. Calvary. The names go on.
I spent a few hours touring the grounds of Green-Wood with Jeff Richman, the cemetery’s historian. The space is beautiful. Trees tower and curve and throw long spiralling shadows over tombs and headstones. It is redolent of wealth.Long-dead New Yorkers plotted an eternal rest in which they intended to occupy the same kind of space they demanded in life. Tombs became like houses, with wrought-iron fences and benches set in small gardens. Death for New York’s richest came at a high price – in terms of both money and space.

At the time, it might not have seemed like a problem. Walt Whitman, reporting for the Brooklyn Daily Eagle, toured Green-Wood and remarked on its beauty. “But how sweet and peaceful will be their slumbers!” he wrote, “How calmly will they rest in their silent mansions, till the night, the moonless night of death is passed.”
During the tour, we passed Lot 44606, a benign stretch of ground dotted with burial markers. But, if you looked closer, you could see there used to be a road where these grave markers now stood. It looked too planned, like a new concrete condo in Brooklyn on a block of old brownstones.
In a 2009 New York Times article, the cemetery’s researcher Kestutis Demereckas told writer Michael Wilson how he found space for new graves at Green-Wood. After covering various old paths or roads with new bodies, he laboured over old maps, trying to find small spaces where new plots could be dug. According to the article, the cemetery was going to run out of space any day. Any day is arriving fast.
 “An eternal rest in which they intended to occupy the same kind of space they demanded in life.” ... A mausoleum at Green-Wood Cemetery. Photograph: Mary Altaffer/AP
Richman said there was no limit to what the cemetery could do, whether by rearranging the grounds to make space for new arrivals or by talking with developers and trustees to rearrange the cemetery’s vision to cater to new customers. What he did not say was that the cost of a single grave plot in Green-Wood starts at $19,000. Indeed, nearly every cemetery in New York City suffers from the problem of decreasing space for a number of dead thatwill continue to rise relentlessly. Plot prices are rising and in-ground burials at certain cemeteries, such as Trinity Cemetery in Manhattan, are no longer allowed. Some people lucky enough to own plots in New York City are selling them on Craigslist.
Not long ago, I walked with Vincent Carbone, who owns Carbone Memorials, an independent memorial service in Brooklyn, as he went to check on a job in The Evergreens. In the midst of all this change, tradespeople like Carbone have almost stopped existing, left floundering in the wake of a memorialisation business that has become less centred around independent shops and more concentrated on bigger, cheaper, more efficient corporations. I watched two of his contractors sandblast a decorative set of hearts into a new headstone that nearly touched another headstone. Everywhere I looked, headstones stuck together like kids in line for recess. Somewhere in the distance, the Jackie Robinson Parkway hummed, jutting right up to the cemetery’s expanse.
 Grave-sites of veterans of the Civil War, American Revolution, Spanish-American War, Korean and Vietnam wars in Cypress Hills Cemetery. Photograph: Craig Ruttle/AP
Advertisement
Almost every New Yorker will pass above, beneath, beside or through a cemetery at some point in their given day. We are prepositionally related to the dead. Not just the recent dead, either, and sometimes not even the real dead. When I attended Fordham University, there was a common myth about the on-campus cemetery, which contained just a few dozen graves: that school leaders constructed it to block a highway from being built through the campus, that there were no bodies in it. Like all myths, it felt just odd and right enough to be true.

The forgotten, abused, cast-out and neglected bury the forgotten, abused, cast-out and neglected, away from the public eye
In Soho in 1991, the city approved plans to build a $276m, 30-plus-storey federal building, before it found out that more than 400 bodies sat below it, in an old interment site known centuries ago as Negros Burial Ground. Though the city continued to build the tower, it altered the design and gave the burial ground historical landmark status and, later, a memorial.
This wasn’t, and isn’t, a new problem for the city. Famous sites such as Washington Square Park, where many believe up to 20,000 people still lie buried in a potter’s field beneath its arch, and the Brooklyn Navy Yard all sit on old burial sites of poor, marginalised or disenfranchised groups.
 Calvary Cemetery in Queens. Plots in many of New York’s cemeteries are increasingly rare – and expensive. Photograph: Alamy
And then, perhaps most eerily present, there is Hart Island, the small, barren plot of land viewable from City Island in the Bronx. Here, Riker’s Island inmates are paid 50 cents an hour to bury the city’s poor and unclaimed dead in trenches, not plots. Babies, fathers and mothers alike. Out there in the Long Island Sound, away from the city’s view, inmates dig mass graves for people most people will never know lived. The forgotten, abused, cast-out and neglected bury the forgotten, abused, cast-out and neglected, away from the public eye. As if to add punishment to poverty, Hart Island cannot be accessed in the same way as a regular city cemetery. If, for example, a son wanted to visit his long-lost mother, who died in New York City, whose body went unclaimed, made an extended stay at a morgue, was operated on at a medical school and then found its way to Hart Island, that son would have to wait for the once-a-month family visit day. When he finally arrived on the island after a ferry ride, his mother’s grave would be located via a trench number, and that trench shared with over a hundred other bodies.
 Markers show the location of some of the mass graves on Hart Island. The island has served for 150 years as New York’s burial ground for the poor and nameless. Photograph: Seth Wenig/AP
I don’t doubt that Jacob Bigelow wanted the best for the people and city he loved, that he wanted to create a space of beauty for people who craved solace. But now, almost two centuries later, the very cemeteries that Bigelow inspired are overcrowded and often overpriced. When I went to Green-Wood, I stood and looked out toward the Statue of Liberty and tried to imagine what used to decorate my field of vision: green hills rolling into the water before disappearing. The day I stood there, the city came right up to the cemetery’s fence, and a group of union workers marched in a circle outside a business, striking for something they needed but weren’t being given.
When burial space does finally, inevitably run out, the bodies of New Yorkers who are marginalised, poor and disenfranchised – or even simply not rich – will be the ones spending eternity somewhere other than the city in which they lived. There will be no room for them. It will be a kind of gentrification of the dead.

Death in the city: what happens when all our cemeteries are full?

When Carbone and I left the cemetery, he pointed at a mausoleum.
“Trommer,” he said, indicating the family name on the tomb. “He used to own this brewery, straight ahead. It used to be right there.”
Carbone pointed right in front of us. Now, there was a Popeye’s, a gas station. A block away there was Carbone’s memorial shop, clinging to survival, jammed underneath the rattle of a subway track. The city advances. The living need space, but what of our dead?

---

In praise of gentrification
The economist

Accusations levelled at gentrification in America lack force, meanwhile its benefits go unsung

GENTRIFIER has surpassed many worthier slurs to become the dirtiest word in American cities. In the popular telling, hordes of well-to-do whites are descending upon poor, minority neighbourhoods that were made to endure decades of discrimination. With their avocado on toast, beard oil and cappuccinos, these people snuff out local culture. As rents rise, lifelong residents are evicted and forced to leave. In this view, the quintessential scene might be one witnessed in Oakland, California, where a miserable-looking homeless encampment rests a mere ten-minute walk from a Whole Foods landscaped with palm trees and bougainvillea, offering chia and flax seed upon entry. An ancient, sinister force lurks behind the overpriced produce. “‘Gentrification’ is but a more pleasing name for white supremacy,” wrote Ta-Nehisi Coates. It is “the interest on enslavement, the interest on Jim Crow, the interest on redlining, compounding across the years.”

This story is better described as an urban myth. The supposed ills of gentrification—which might be more neutrally defined as poorer urban neighbourhoods becoming wealthier—lack rigorous support. The most careful empirical analyses conducted by urban economists have failed to detect a rise in displacement within gentrifying neighbourhoods. Often, they find that poor residents are more likely to stay put if they live in these areas. At the same time, the benefits of gentrification are scarcely considered. Longtime residents reap the rewards of reduced crime and better amenities. Those lucky enough to own their homes come out richer. The left usually bemoans the lack of investment in historically non-white neighbourhoods, white flight from city centres and economic segregation. Yet gentrification straightforwardly reverses each of those regrettable trends.

One in, none out

The anti-gentrification brigades often cite anecdotes from residents forced to move. Yet the data suggest a different story. An influential study by Lance Freeman and Frank Braconi found that poor residents living in New York’s gentrifying neighbourhoods during the 1990s were actually less likely to move than poor residents of non-gentrifying areas. A follow-up study by Mr Freeman, using a nationwide sample, found scant association between gentrification and displacement. A more recent examination found that financially vulnerable residents in Philadelphia—those with low credit scores and no mortgages—are no more likely to move if they live in a gentrifying neighbourhood.

These studies undermine the widely held belief that for every horrid kale-munching millennial moving in, one longtime resident must be chucked out. The surprising result is explained by three underlying trends.

The first is that poor Americans are obliged to move very frequently, regardless of the circumstances of their district, as the Princeton sociologist Matthew Desmond so harrowingly demonstrated in his research on eviction. The second is that poor neighbourhoods have lacked investment for decades, and so have considerable slack in their commercial and residential property markets. A lot of wealthier city dwellers can thus move in without pushing out incumbent residents or businesses. “Given the typical pattern of low-income renter mobility in New York City, a neighbourhood could go from a 30% poverty population to 12% in as few as ten years without any displacement whatsoever,” noted Messrs Freeman and Braconi in their study. Indeed, the number of poor people living in New York’s gentrifying neighbourhoods barely budged from 1990 to 2014, according to a study by New York University’s Furman Centre. Third, city governments often promote affordable-housing schemes, such as rent control or stabilisation, in response to rising rents.

Gentrification has been so thoroughly demonised that a mere discussion of its benefits might seem subversive. That does not make them any less real. Residents of gentrifying neighbourhoods who own their homes have reaped considerable windfalls. One black resident of Logan Circle, a residential district in downtown Washington, bought his home in 1993 for $130,000. He recently sold it for $1.6m. Businesses gain from having more customers, with more to spend. Having new shops, like well-stocked grocery stores, and sources of employment nearby can reduce commuting costs and time. Tax collection surges and so does political clout. Crime, already on the decline in American city centres, seems to fall even further in gentrifying neighbourhoods, as MIT economists observed after Cambridge, Massachusetts, undid its rent-control scheme.

Those who bemoan segregation and gentrification simultaneously risk contradiction. The introduction of affluent, white residents into poor, minority districts boosts racial and economic integration. It can dilute the concentration of poverty—which a mountain of economic and sociological literature has linked to all manner of poor outcomes, including teenage pregnancy, incarceration and early death. Gentrification steers cash into deprived neighbourhoods and brings people into depopulated areas through market forces, all without the necessity of governmental intervention. The Trump administration is unlikely to offer large infusions of cash to dilapidated cities. In these circumstances, arguing against gentrification can amount to insistence that poor neighbourhoods remain poor and that racially segregated neighbourhoods stay cut off.

What, then, accounts for the antipathy towards gentrification? The first reason is financial. Though the process has been going on for a few decades, the increased attention comes in the middle of a broader concern about the cost of housing in American cities. The share of households that are “rent burdened”—those spending more than 30% of pre-tax income on rent—has increased from 32% in 2001 to 38% in 2015. Things are worse among the poor; 52% of those below the federal poverty line spend over half their income on housing. Rents have risen dramatically, though this can be the fault of thoughtless regulations which hinder supply more than the malevolence of gentrifiers. The net creation of jobs has outpaced additional housing in New York City by a rate of two to one. In San Francisco, perhaps the most restricted American metropolitan area, this ratio is eight to one.

A second reason gentrification is disliked is culture. The argument is that the arrival of yuppie professionals sipping kombucha will alter the character of a place in an unseemly way. “Don’t Brooklyn my Detroit” T-shirts are now a common sight in Motor City. In truth, Detroit would do well with a bit more Brooklyn. Across big American cities, for every gentrifying neighbourhood ten remain poor. Opposing gentrification has become a way for people to display their anti-racist bona fides. This leads to the exaggerated equation of gentrification with white supremacy. Such objections parallel those made by white NIMBYs who fret that a new bus stop or apartment complex will bring people who might also alter the culture of their neighbourhood—for the worse.

Porcini progressives

The term gentrification has become tarred. But called by any other name—revitalisation, reinvestment, renaissance—it would smell sweet. Take Shaw, a historical centre of black culture in Washington which limped into the 1970s as a shadow of itself after a series of race riots. Decades of decline followed, in which a crack epidemic caused the murder rate to spike. Today, crime is down. The O Street Market, where one person was killed and eight were injured in a shoot-out in 1994, is now a tranquil grocery store. Luxury flats with angular chairs and oversized espresso machines in the lobby have sprouted opposite liquor stores. An avant-garde speakeasy beckons from the basement beneath a humble doughnut store. At the Columbia Room, a wood-panelled bar with leather chairs, mixologists conjure $16 concoctions of scotch, blackberry shrub and porcini mushrooms. This is how progress tastes.

---

How To Know If Your Neighborhood Is Being Gentrified

A new study of gentrification shows that the addition of a coffee shop or restaurant in your neighborhood could be an early indicator that housing prices are about to spike.

The research also casts some doubt on the often-expressed belief that gentrification can ruin neighborhoods by forcing out existing businesses that serve the needs of the locals.

“We found that changes in the local economy—such as a new coffee shop opening—can predict gentrification,” says Harvard Business School's Michael Luca, Lee J. Styslinger III associate professor of business aAdministration, who coauthored the study. “Our results also suggest that a range of local businesses actually expand during periods of gentrification.”


The findings are included in the new paper Nowcasting Gentrification: Using Yelp Data to Quantify Neighborhood Change (pdf), written by Luca, Harvard University Economics Professor Edward L. Glaeser, and HBS doctoral student Hyunjin Kim.

The researchers combined data from U.S. Census reports, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, Google Street View, and Yelp to explore gentrification in New York, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, and San Francisco.

Among the findings:

The opening of a Starbucks—and cafes more generally—is a leading indicator of gentrification, and is associated with an increase in local housing prices of .5%.
Gentrifying neighborhoods tend to spawn a growing number of grocery stores, cafes, restaurants, and bars. But there is a chicken-and-egg question of what ignites that development.
Although it’s possible some existing shops could be squeezed out by the influx (the report didn’t specifically study that question), the overall trend is that the number of businesses in that area will expand.
Yelp measures of local business activity, such as prices and user ratings, provide a new way of studying the economy. This data can provide indicators that gentrification is occurring, forecast an increase in housing prices, and shed new light on the evolution of the local economy at the neighborhood level in close to real time.
Although the study helps identify where gentrification is occurring, it’s unclear what’s causing what. “It could be that people see a Starbucks coming in and say, ‘This is a neighborhood we should move into,’” says Glaeser, an urban economist and author of the book Triumph of the City. “But we think it is more likely that Starbucks has insight into neighborhoods that are going to be expanding.”

Either way, a new Starbucks is a predictor of rising housing prices. “If you want to know if a neighborhood is going to be booming in terms of housing prices, the hip new coffee shop may be a harbinger of things to come,” says Luca.

The study didn’t specifically track the fate of existing shops or services after new businesses started opening in the area, so it’s possible the occasional shop might be crowded out by gentrification. Nevertheless, Kim says, “Demographic changes that are widely seen as measures of gentrification are accompanied by growth in the number of businesses in every category we examined.”

Creating Better Public Policy

Gentrification has swept through some of America’s largest cities, including San Francisco, Manhattan and New Orleans. With it comes familiar arguments both for and against.

Private developers and other supporters argue that new restaurants and retail shops, high-rise housing, and other spruce-ups revitalize communities by attracting outside investment and luring new residents. Critics counter that the improvements come with downsides, starting with the loss of affordable housing and the tearing apart of established communities. The escalation in housing prices often forces the poorest residents to move out, making way for new occupants who are richer—and whiter.

These social pressures often put city planners in the uncomfortable spot of trying to maintain the tricky balance of bolstering economic development without completely killing cultural diversity. Glaeser, Kim and Luca believe their novel approach, which mashes up data from online platforms with more traditional data sets, can drive better public policy by providing a real-time glimpse of changing neighborhoods, allowing policymakers to “forecast” where gentrification might be occurring and measure its effects.

The team has worked closely with cities to explore gentrification, meeting with politicians, policymakers, and chief data officers to discuss their research findings.

The researchers are excited about one particular data source: the online platform Yelp, which runs business listings and reviews written by customers. Unlike traditional Census data, which can take years to develop, Yelp provides a real-time look inside the local economy to see what types of businesses are growing and how a neighborhood is changing.

“You can get Yelp data much more quickly, and the data is more granular,” says Luca. “Yelp will give you a better snapshot of a neighborhood and fill in blanks that Census data doesn’t capture.

To measure business changes, the researchers studied Yelp data between 2007 and 2016. In addition to finding the boost in housing prices with a Starbucks entering a neighborhood, they also found that the growth in the number of Starbucks reviews is even more predictive of neighborhood change: With every 10 extra reviews a business received, housing prices in that zip code increased by 1.4%.

More College-Educated Residents = More Food Options

To compare housing prices with other markers of gentrification, the researchers turned to the Federal Housing Finance Agency in New York City between 2012 and 2016. They studied three demographic measures of neighborhood change: percent of residents with a college degree; percent of residents between 25 and 34 years old; and percent of residents who were white.

Changes in the business landscape were particularly associated with the number of college-educated residents, and less so with the age of residents and racial composition of a neighborhood.

Growth in grocery stores, bars, restaurants, and cafes—especially the pricier places—were good predictors of an uptick in the number of college-educated residents within a particular area.

The opposite also appears true, though—that neighborhoods with less educated, lower-income residents have fewer grocery store and restaurant choices nearby. “These results seem compatible with the literature on ‘food deserts’ that documents how poorer people live in areas with fewer options for healthy food,” the paper says.

The team also examined how local business activity varied with changes in a StreetScore rating, a computer-generated, crowdsourced measure of how people perceive the safety of a street scene captured in Google Street View images. The data, captured from 2007 to 2014, allowed researchers to track the overall physical quality of a neighborhood. Increases in the number of Starbucks and other cafes, vegetarian restaurants, and bars equated with higher StreetScores.

“You have better paint on buildings and better landscaping. It all makes a difference in the StreetScore,” Glaeser says. “And a change in StreetScore is one of the first indications of a neighborhood change.”

In studying several cities, the researchers found many of the same patterns—florists, groceries, and bars seemed to go hand in hand with gentrification. And in New York, the number of laundromats was also related to gentrification.

Luca says online platforms provide an exciting opportunity for planners and policymakers to tap into useful data that could inform both commercial development and residential housing decisions.

“There’s a real opportunity in all of this,” he says. “Online platforms can help businesses, consumers, and policymakers turn this real-time data into actionable insights.”

---

When ‘Gentrification’ Isn’t About Housing

New York Times

Last winter, midway through my hourlong commute into Midtown Manhattan — having traversed part of Queens and all of chic north Brooklyn — I found myself reading about how a dish called a “chopped cheese,” a sort of cheese steak made with hamburger meat, had been gentrified. Once a specialty of uptown bodegas, the sandwich had caught the attention of novelty-seeking foodies: Whole Foods was selling them for twice what they cost in the Bronx, where they went for $4 and still do.

The story of how we came to use an urban-theory concept like gentrification to talk about food might actually begin with Whole Foods. In 2014, when the company called collard greens “the new kale,” Mikki Kendall, writing in The Grio, labeled this “food gentrification” — the first step in a process whereby collards would become the sort of thing that smoothie shops pulverize into drinkability for well-heeled consumers. Kendall wondered if the greens might become pricier as a result. Some responded that there was little to worry about — kale’s cost had hardly budged over a decade of trendiness — but as the conversation progressed, it became clear that the issue wasn’t really commodity pricing; it was cultural ownership. Soon just about any traditional dish that found itself subjected to the enthusiasms of white foodie-dom was said to be “gentrified”: guacamole, egg creams, soup dumplings, burritos, pho. (This last one produced the unforgettable Huffington Post headline “This Food-Bro Is Gentrifying Vietnamese Pho.”)


This usage proved awkward when it returned, twisted about itself like a Möbius strip, to questions of housing and economics. In 2016, BuzzFeed published an article by Doree Shafrir on the “tiny house” phenomenon — a vogue for living “simply” in minuscule, movable homes. The trend manages to cram a tremendous number of tedious affectations into tight quarters: design fetishism, ostentatious minimalism, costly self-abnegation. Shafrir points out that it’s “not new for people to be living in R.V.s or mobile homes; it’s just that there’s a new vocabulary to gentrify living in a small space.” A recent article in The New Republic, by Sarah Jones, connected tiny houses to two other lifestyle trends: “raw water” (unfiltered drinking water, often collected from the natural environment) and “#vanlife” (living in a van, but on Instagram). Those who collect their drinking water, Jones writes, have “adopted a hardship that poor people suffer, and stripped it of its association with poverty.” She adds: “Raw water is a way of gentrifying that poverty.”

The poor are still gentrification’s victims, but in this new meaning, the harm is not rent increases and displacement — it’s something psychic, a theft of pride. Unlike housing, poverty is a potentially endless resource: Jeff Bezos could Hoover up all the wealth that exists in the world, then do nothing but drink rainwater collected from the roof of his ’79 Vanagon, and it wouldn’t stop the other seven billion of us from being poor. What this metaphorical gentrification points to instead is dishonesty, carelessness and cluelessness on the part of the privileged when they clomp into unfamiliar territory. When they actually profit from their “discovery” and repackaging of other people’s lifestyles, it’s a dispiriting re-enactment of long-running inequalities. But what seems most galling isn’t that they’re taking dollars off the table. It’s that they’re annoying.

It’s not surprising that “gentrification” has become a more capacious idea lately: The phenomena it describes seem inescapable. But there’s something in this new usage that obfuscates as much as it reveals, lending cover to the much larger forces that shape our lives. Minority communities are being dismantled as macroeconomic winds transform urban America. Researchers are now concerned that the high cost of housing is a drag on our whole economy, with young people either trapped spending too much on rent or fleeing overheated urban markets altogether for places with worse jobs but cheaper housing. Some of them, I’ve heard, are even living out of vans.

The word “gentrification” was coined almost offhandedly in 1964, by the British sociologist Ruth Glass, in an essay about postwar London. Looking around her, she saw a city becoming more modern and affluent. This came with certain ills: Commutes were getting longer, traffic worse, middle-class jobs more specialized (“project engineer”; “system analyst”) and menial ones more scarce. And something striking was happening in the working-class parts of town. They were being “invaded by the middle classes — upper and lower.” These newcomers were buying up the “shabby, modest mews and cottages” and turning them into “elegant, expensive residences.” “Once this process of ‘gentrification’ starts in a district,” Glass writes, “it goes on rapidly until all or most of the working-class occupiers are displaced, and the whole social character of the district is changed.”

Her coinage contained within it an ambiguity that persists to this day. The root of “gentrification” — “gentry” — can refer either to those of not-quite-aristocratic birth or to those who profit from land ownership; either to the well-off in general or to the rentier class in particular. This lack of clarity is fitting: In a gentrifying neighborhood, title to the land is transferred first in the literal sense and then in the spiritual one, as local businesses and institutions change to serve the tastes of wealthier arrivals. To use “gentrification” to describe lifestyle trends is to focus on that second step rather than the first one — to focus on class signifiers instead of class itself.

Last year, the academics Jason Patch, John Joe Schlichtman and Marc Lamont Hill published a book about gentrification that examined their own roles in the process, branding themselves right in the title: “Gentrifier.” This is another fascinating new twist on Glass’s term. After all, Britain’s rigid class system made it easy enough for her to clearly identify the people doing the gentrifying: It was the gentry. Here in the States, though, we’ve adopted a novel word meaning “one who gentrifies” — the active colonist, someone who tries on neighborhoods like shirts at a thrift shop. This turns gentrification into a lifestyle choice. Hence the scores of listicles that have cropped up on websites that cater to well-meaning millennials, working either to steer the budding gentrifier in a noble direction (Thought Catalog’s “10 Rules for Being a Good Gentrifier From an Urban Planner in Brooklyn”) or to suggest that she might avoid the epithet while still participating in the process (AlterNet’s “20 Ways Not to Be a Gentrifier”). Invariably these articles suggest shopping locally, talking to your neighbors and, above all, being self-aware about your impact. Befriending your bodega guy is a great thing to do, but it’s of limited assistance when the landlord triples his rent.


If the logic of conscious consumerism has come to infect what we mean by “gentrification,” perhaps it’s because the process always begins with people who are expected to know better: the “creative class.” In a 1979 book called “Neighborhood Renewal,” the urban theorist Phillip L. Clay outlined four stages of gentrification: In the first, “pioneers” — often bohemians and artists — move to dilapidated or abandoned areas in search of cheaper rents; in the second, the middle classes follow; in the third, their numbers displace the original population; and in the final stage, the neighborhood is fully turned over to banks, developers and the wealthy. By this point, the artists are being priced out to another subway stop or another city — where they will be greeted as though they’ve come seeking adventure.

But the journalist Peter Moskowitz, in the 2017 book “How to Kill a City,” suggests a fifth stage should be added to Clay’s list, so we can accommodate arrangements like those in Midtown Manhattan, where multimillion-dollar condominiums are built and sold to shell corporations, presumably owned by foreign billionaires, and often left vacant. “The fifth and last phase of gentrification,” he writes, “is when neighborhoods aren’t just more friendly to capital than to people but cease being places to live a normal life.” New York’s skyline is erupting with buildings like these — stacks of cash-stuffed mattresses teetering in the wind. And The Times reported last year that the West Village’s Bleecker Street had fallen victim to “high-rent blight,” with commercial space becoming so expensive ($45,000 a month) that even Marc Jacobs couldn’t keep his stores open; shops that once catered to the wealthy now sit empty, waiting for a tenant who can foot the bill. When the heist is done and it’s time to split the loot, capital snuffs out culture.

And yet it’s culture — and its perceived appropriation — that has ingrained itself in the way we think about gentrification. It’s almost as though, in the face of unstoppable, invisible forces, we’ve grabbed hold of what we can see and control. Investors could buy and sell every building on your block without your ever noticing, but the coffee shop where the staff is mean to everybody is right in front of you. All the while, global flows of capital course through your metropolis, wearing down every bump and cranny. They will continue until the day it’s finally as smooth and featureless as a river rock — and you’re shopping around for a reasonably cozy van.

---

From Californian Exceptionalism to Statewide Gentrification

Real Clear Policy

“[The] development of the West is being predicated on fragmentary information, improvised planning, and the opportunistic promotion of ‘projects.’” So wrote the late, great writer and journalist Carey McWilliams in 1949. He concludes his book, “California: The Great Exception,” with this sentence:

California needs men and women who can see beyond its mountains; who can see the entire West, and realize that, as with all good things, there comes a time when the gold runs out, when the exception disappears in the rule, and when California … must, indeed put on knowledge with its power and adopt, as an official policy, the same generous open-handedness with which its magic mountains have showered benefits on those lucky people, the Californians.

McWilliams wrote these words as he witnessed California’s population explosion during and after World War II. In the 1940s and 50s, the state’s population more than doubled. Millions and millions of new Californians claimed the state motto: “Eureka!” (“I found it!”). While there was an initial period of “improvised planning,” state leaders in government, business, and civil society responded with breath-taking speed and creativity. As a state, we were young, ambitious, positive, welcoming.

What the heck happened?

A recent study by the state’s non-partisan Legislative Analysts’ Office (LAO) noted that between 2007 to 2016, 1 million more Californians left the state than moved in. These numbers are fairly consistent with trends we’ve seen in the last two decades, but the LAO researchers offer two reasons why this time is more alarming.

First, the states Californians are moving to and those newcomers are arriving from. Californians are moving to Texas, Arizona, Nevada, and Oregon by the hundreds of thousands. And they’re coming from New York, Illinois, New Jersey, and Michigan in the tens of thousands. The report notes that this is the first time there has been this level of consistency.

Secondly, the report highlights the particular people who are coming and going — in ways that dismantle California’s long-held image of itself as a burgeoning middle-class paradise, which McWilliams described more than half a century ago. By annual household income, Californians left the state in every category from “Under $15,000” up through $110,000. Starting at $111,000 and up, we see increases in new Californians moving in. What’s more, the LAO writes, “Families with kids and those and those with only a high school education predominate among those moving from California.” More kids (those under 18 years old) have left California in the last decade than any other age cohort.

A state once known as a middle-class oasis is becoming increasingly older, richer, and less family-friendly. The reasons for these movements are well-known, from sky-rocketing housing prices to a lack of lower-middle-class jobs to the cost of energy — and don’t forget those taxes. A recent state-by-state study by CNBC even found the average cost of a ribeye steak and a gallon of milk to be higher in California than almost every other state, giving us an “F” grade in “Cost of Living.”

We agree with California real-estate writer and analyst Patrick Sisson’s recent assessment of these developments: “California’s experiencing what looks like statewide gentrification.”

But California as a whole — including our government and major business and civic institutions — seems either disengaged or overwhelmed by these historic trends. Once again, as McWilliams wrote before one of the last major population changes in our state’s history, we appear to be responding with “improvised” policy-making based on “fragmentary information.” It’s as if we don’t view these challenges as the “man-made problems” they really are, or worse, some are just hoping these problems will go away with the next recession.

This is why the two of us have joined a bipartisan group of Californians — policy researchers, former pols, and community advocates — in forming something called the Economic Mobility Collaborative. The group has met up and down the state over the last year to deliberate over the central question: “How do we return California to a place of economic opportunity for all?” Our efforts are framed in a letter to the next governor. It’s signed by scores of the state’s civic leaders, and we welcome your signature too.

In particular, in this election year, we call on our next governor to take what is really a very Californian approach to solving problems — evaluate, track, and respond. “We will urge the next Governor to endorse clear, specific targets for the state to achieve by 2030, and easy-to-follow metrics to track progress. Our shared goal should be measurable, visible change” in returning California to the economically diverse state it once was.

Unlike the era McWilliams lived through, today the public policy world is increasingly transparent. Big data is used to form “policy performance dashboards” that track budgets, economic development, and infrastructure building and maintenance. In the last two decades, California has made significant progress in reducing greenhouse-gas emissions through multi-year goal-setting and regular assessment, and the aforementioned LAO studies the economic impact of legislative measures and ballot proposals.

The time has come to match these new tools of analysis with the political will to do what Californians have always done: solve problems and provide opportunity for all.

---

'There Isn't A Just Housing Choice': How We've Enabled The Pains Of Gentrification

NPR

Gentrification is no longer something that just happens in low-income neighborhoods. As the phenomenon displaces communities of color, from Inglewood to Washington, D.C., "gentrification" has been co-opted to include food and culture as well. So, what does the loaded term really mean?

According to urban sociologist John Schlichtman, gentrification cannot happen without disinvestment. In the book Gentrifier, Schlichtman and his co-authors, Marc Hill and Jason Patch, define gentrification as "the reinvestment of real estate investment money or capital into dis-invested, devalued, centrally-located neighborhoods, which fosters a new infrastructure for middle and high-income residents."

The reason gentrification has a bad rap is due to the inequity between race and housing. "Race is, at its heart, a class issue," Schlichtman says. The devaluing of lower-class neighborhoods, usually residents of color, is the result of a history of unjust policies, including government defunding and redlining.

Old Confronts New In A Gentrifying D.C. Neighborhood
NATIONAL
Old Confronts New In A Gentrifying D.C. Neighborhood
What Does It Take To See Gentrification Before It Happens?
13.7: COSMOS AND CULTURE
What Does It Take To See Gentrification Before It Happens?
"There is an unusual gap between the devaluing and the revaluing in the United States," Schlichtman says. "How that gap is filled needs to be controlled. We can't just let a tsunami of investment fill that gap. It's obviously going to wash things away."

Schlichtman spoke with NPR's Lulu Garcia-Navarro about the complexities of gentrification, who's responsible for it and how we can minimize the pain it causes through a conscious shifting of priorities.

Interview Highlights
Who is a gentrifier?

A gentrifier is a middle-class person who moves into a disinvested context at a time when other people are doing the same. And, that middle-class person is bringing middle-class buying power. And that effect occurs regardless of the racial, religious, class upbringing of that individual. But they're entering into a context in which that devaluing occurred through decades and decades of unjust policies: defunding by the government, redlining, racial covenants, blockbusting.

On "gentrifier guilt"

That guilt is felt because there is a perception that someone is benefiting from an unjust gap. The first question I ask in regards to gentrifier guilt is: What is the just context for a middle-class housing consumer? Is it the suburb? Is it the devalued neighborhood? Is it the bottom of a middle-class enclave in the city that has never had the devaluing? Is that the just context?

There are many people of all backgrounds in the United States who are struggling with their housing choice and trying to figure out what the ethical footprint of their housing choice will be. I would argue that we have painted ourselves into a corner because of our history in the United States where there isn't a just housing choice.

When A Historically Black University's Neighborhood Turns White

On advice for people who have moved into a gentrified neighborhood

You can't behave your way out of gentrification, but you can be a kind person. Much of the pain that occurs as a result of gentrification is the result of people who move into neighborhoods and they're imagining a future neighborhood. So no, supporting businesses that are currently existing, that's not going to stop gentrification but it is going to make people like you more.

I think people need to own where they live; don't say you can't live somewhere else if you're middle-class. You could live in that suburb that isn't gentrifying. You could live at the bottom end of that middle-class community in the city that isn't gentrifying. But, there are other things that you're looking for. You're looking for class diversity, a racial diversity, an ethnic diversity. You're looking for restaurants; you're looking for a specific type of architecture. So, be honest about your housing choice.

And finally, this needs to be fought with large-scale things. We need to put pressure on our city governments as a community to not put profit and investment as the number one priority. It can be balanced with other priorities of community.

---

Have big cities hijacked the gentrification debate?

City Metric

In July 2017, a group of long-time, mostly Latino residents of Los Angeles’s Boyle Heights neighborhood staged protests outside a trendy new coffee shop called Weird Wave Coffee, holding signs that read “Amerikkkano” and “WHITE COFFEE.”

ADVERTISING

inRead invented by Teads
Across the country in Brooklyn’s rapidly gentrifying Crown Heights neighborhood, locals lashed out over a new restaurant with decor that included fake bullet holes and a menu that offered a drink called “40 ounce rosé” (malt liquor and wine) served in a paper bag.

Over the past few decades, gentrification debates have migrated from the pages of academic journals into the streets and the mainstream press.

The word, in many ways, is tinged with negativity. And for good reason. In tight real estate markets, it can lead to development that privileges profits over community and shuts people out of neighborhoods they have lived in for decades.

But what about cities struggling to overcome the threat of bankruptcy like Hartford? How does gentrification look in New South cities like Austin and Nashville, where midcentury urban planning destroyed residential communities and left downtowns largely unoccupied?

While doing research on the economic health of Hartford, one of us asked the head of a downtown Hartford nonprofit about gentrification. Her response? “We could use some of that. But we are so far away from it, it’s not even an issue.”

If residential patterns and urban areas vary, so too must the story of gentrification. In other words: Have big cities hijacked the gentrification debate?

The origins of gentrification
“Gentrification” is a term coined by the British sociologist Ruth Glass in 1964 to explain the return of the middle class to London’s city centre.

In the US, academics and urban planners first started extensively talking about and debating gentrification in the 1970s. Between 1950 and 1970, urban manufacturing went overseas and white middle-class city-dwellers moved to the suburbs. Concerns over blighted urban centers grew. Sociologists, planners and geographers found new cultural and economic trends to study related to the rise of artist and middle-class loft living and the return of capital investment to urban centers.

Today, the meaning of gentrification no longer refers to the “return to the center.” Instead, it usually means that new and affluent residents or developers are investing in a neighbourhood.

This infusion of capital changes the relationships within and between communities. Demand increases and property values rise; poorer residents are displaced as wealthier people move in; new shops appear and the public image of the neighborhood changes. High demand can incentivise landlords to evict residents, at times using egregious practices – like hiring someone to harass renters – in order to escalate rental prices.

Extreme gentrification takes place in the highest-rent, highest-demand places like San Francisco or New York’s Greenwich Village. Rents in New York’s once-booming Bleecker Street have become so astronomical that vacancy is now a problem of too much demand, rather than not enough: property owners now keep their storefronts empty, hoping a major chain will want to locate in the high-visibility district.

Gentrification isn’t all negative. In an influential and counterintuitive study, Lance Freeman and Frank Braconi, who study urban development, found that poorer residents were less likely to move out of gentrifying neighborhoods than nongentrifying neighborhoods. Safety improves with gentrification, and so can services and amenities.

While some neighborhoods experience positive outcomes, gentrification studies are mostly concerned with access to housing, public space and the loss of community. It seems impossible not to view New York, San Francisco, Los Angeles or Boston through the lens of skyrocketing real estate and displaced residents.

What about other kinds of places?

The urban in-between
When cities experienced population and economic decline decades ago, some, like New York and Boston, found ways to rebound. Others, like Detroit or Connecticut’s largest city, Hartford, did not.


Stephen Henderson
@SHDetroit
 Sorry.. as a Detroit native who has seen this place rot from the inside out, I'd kill for a little gentrification. #detroitfuture #gentd

5:34 PM - Dec 14, 2011
2
See Stephen Henderson's other Tweets
Twitter Ads info and privacy
Hartford continues to experience unusual and difficult financial circumstances. The city has low home-ownership rates and high poverty rates. But maybe more significant is that the city is the state’s capital. Half of the city’s real estate is made up of government buildings, educational facilities or hospitals – all of which are non-taxable. With a $65m deficit, Hartford is now on the verge of bankruptcy.

Where is Hartford’s gentrification? Or, more precisely, is there a kind of gentrification that would be welcomed in a place like Hartford? A place like Hartford could learn from smaller cities, which are less afflicted by the bloated real estate and speculation that plague places like New York and San Francisco.

In a deindustrialised small city like North Adams, Massachusetts, for example, gentrification is welcomed. The old mill city near the Berkshire Mountains had its sprawling electrical manufacturing plant, Sprague Electric, transformed into a contemporary fine art museum, MASS MoCA. The museum, in turn, helped transformed the city from a shrinking post-industrial community into an arts and cultural destination. The museum injected $34.4m into the local economy in 2015, drawing tourists, lowering unemployment levels and creating opportunities for new businesses.

Tourism jobs are not the skilled union jobs Sprague Electric once offered. But without other opportunities, the community welcomes this kind of gentrification. The town was built for 20,000, but only has 13,000 residents. The community wants – indeed, it needs – more people.

There is also what we could call “empty lot” gentrification. Gentrification doesn’t always displace existing populations. Consider cities like Nashville, Tennessee and Austin, Texas, where suburbs bloomed in the post war era. The center cities never housed the heavy manufacturing of northeastern and Rust Belt cities; until recently, they remained sites of light manufacturing, parking garages and empty lots.

In the early 2000s, former Austin mayor (and real estate entrepreneur) Will Wynn sought to build more residential properties in downtown Austin, and Austin has since seen dramatic residential growth. Empty lot gentrification has its own issues: it can create downtowns for elites. Concerns over gentrification beyond Austin’s city centre have grown, and Austin’s famed music venues are getting priced out.


A tale of two kinds of cities.

In bloated real estate markets like New York or San Francisco, critics of gentrification see even the smallest changes – a new park or a new coffee shop – as harbingers for inevitable neighborhood ruin.

For cities needing gentrification, the issues are different. The conversation about popular cities has made academics and policy analysts timid about gentrification. Ailing small cities need to increase visibility to attract more people and develop a stable tax-base.

Hardly a call for free market-driven housing policy, there is no reason policies that minimise the negative effects of gentrification – rent control, mixed income housing and limited equity cooperatives – cannot be combined with efforts to attract the middle class.

The gentrification debates should also not blind us to what made New York and San Francisco attractive cities in the first place. The principles of urban activist Jane Jacobs for healthy city life still hold: diverse uses of streets and public places, mixed-use buildings, a variety of economic and commercial opportunities and local excitement about community building.

But simply getting people into the city cannot be overlooked. In North Adams, new opportunities come from investing in the arts. In Pittsburgh, an openness to technical innovation, museums, universities and a dynamic restaurant culture are creating national buzz about a city that continues to lose population. Detroit just hired the nation’s first chief story-teller to help move the narrative away from stale stereotypes. Throughout European cities, night mayors are charged with inspiring excitement around urban nightlife.

Hartford will never become New York. But why not look to North Adams, Pittsburgh or Columbus for examples of a different kind of gentrification?

Displacement in San Mateo
County, California:
Consequences for Housing,
Neighborhoods, Quality of Life, and
Health
May 2017
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY:
Displacement in San Mateo County, California:
Consequences for Housing, Neighborhoods, Quality of Life, and Health
BERKELEY
IGS Research Brief
INSTITUTE OF GOVERNMENTAL STUDIES, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY
Justine Marcus
Miriam Zuk
About IGS
The Institute of Governmental Studies is California’s
oldest public policy research center. As an Organized
Research Unit of the University of California, Berkeley,
IGS expands the understanding of governmental institutions
and the political process through a vigorous
program of research, education, public service, and
publishing.
In metropolitan regions across the country, residents
face constrained, expensive housing markets and rising income
inequality. Middle- and high-income households are
beginning to seek more affordable housing in accessible
neighborhoods with traditionally lower rents and proximity
to jobs and transportation.1
 Many low-income households
are simply unable to secure affordable rents.2
 As neighborhoods
change and housing demand shifts, landlords are presented
with a new set of financial prospects. Displacement
and evictions are central components of this changing landscape,
altering the geography of race and class across regions.
Recent studies have found a spike in evictions in San
Mateo County, disproportionately affecting people of color.3
There is relatively little research on the impacts of displacement
on households, individuals, and communities.
Existing research has shown that evictions negatively affect
the health, quality of life, and economic outlook for households,
often with long-term consequences.4
 This study contributes
to this small but growing body of research, with
results specific to local Bay Area conditions. We assess the
relationship between displacement and housing costs and
quality, commutes, neighborhood location and quality, mental
and physical health, and healthcare access. We completed
in-depth phone surveys with 100 primarily low-income tenants
who received services from Community Legal Services
in East Palo Alto (CLSEPA), which serves low-income communities
in San Mateo County. Survey respondents live in
and/or were displaced from San Mateo County communities.
These surveys provide a window into the consequences
of displacement for households in the San Francisco Bay
Area, with implications for researchers and policymakers
both locally and across the nation.
IGS Research Brief, May 2017 2 Displacement in San Mateo County, California 3
Key Findings
1. Tenants report that, aside from being formally evicted,
they were harassed out by landlords, priced out by market
forces, and pushed out by poor housing conditions.
2. After being displaced, survey respondents were forced
to make difficult and precarious tradeoffs when searching
for housing (e.g., substandard housing conditions,
crowding, moving far away, etc.), limited by both market
forces and exclusionary practices.
3. Approximately one in three displaced households reported
some period of homelessness or marginal housing5
 in the two years following their displacement.
Several of these households remained homeless even
months after they were displaced.
4. After being displaced, only 20 percent of households reported
staying in the same neighborhood (within one
mile of their previous home). Thirty-three percent of
households left San Mateo County, generally moving to
the Central Valley or eastern communities in the East
Bay.
5. After being displaced, households moved to neighborhoods
with fewer job opportunities on average, leading
to longer, more costly commutes for households who
left the county. These new neighborhoods also had more
environmental and safety concerns as well as fewer
healthcare resources.
6. Displacement was a significant disruption and trauma
for respondents and their children. Two out of three
children in displaced households had to change schools.
For the purposes of this research brief, displacement is
used to describe a household move caused by a landlord
action. Such actions include both formal evictions (i.e.,
due to owner move-in, etc.) as well as actions often
characterized as “soft evictions,” such as an untenable
raise in rent or landlord harassment.
All names used in this brief are pseudonyms to ensure
confidentiality.
2 IGS Research Brief, May 2017 3 Displacement in San Mateo County, California
Displacement in San Mateo County,
California:
Consequences for Housing,
Neighborhoods, Quality of Life, and Health
Introduction
The San Francisco Bay Area housing crisis continues
to grow, characterized by skyrocketing rents, a constrained
housing supply, a severe mismatch between housing costs
and incomes,6
 and the displacement of low-income communities
and communities of color.7
 San Mateo County, located
about halfway between San Francisco and San Jose in
the heart of Silicon Valley, is no exception, despite having
one of the highest median household incomes in California
($101,272).8
 Between 2000 and 2015, San Mateo County
lost 44 percent of its “naturally occurring” (nonsubsidized)
affordable housing for low-income households.9
 The
California Housing Partnership Corporation estimates that
in 2015 San Mateo County had a shortfall of 25,882 affordable
rental homes.10 A recent study of evictions cases in San
Mateo County found that between 2012 and 2015 there was
a 59 percent increase in the number of evictions for people
unable to pay rent on time and a 300 percent increase in the
number of “no-cause” evictions.11, 12 These evictions disproportionately
affected Latinx13 and African-American households14
and are enabled by the fact that none of the cities
in San Mateo County, apart from East Palo Alto, have significant
rent control or just-cause for evictions protections.15
How do the region’s housing crisis and displacement epidemic
affect the lives of residents? This study responds to
both the severity of the crisis as well as the scarcity of research
examining the consequences of displacement. The
goal of this study was to assess the impacts of displacement
on tenants’ housing cost and quality, commute,
neighborhood, mental and physical health, and healthcare
access.
The concept of displacement often conjures up images of
an eviction notice, a tenant and landlord in a courtroom, or
the sheriff forcibly evicting a family from their home. While
such an eviction is certainly one scenario, displacement can
be caused by a variety of factors in addition to evictions.16
For the purposes of this brief, displacement is used to describe
any involuntary household move caused by a landlord
action, which can include such things as unaffordable
rent increases or landlord harassment. Displacement disrupts
the stability of a household and a neighborhood. It is
critical to note, however, that stability is not the absence of
mobility; mobility is the ability to choose to stay or to move.
Displacement removes that choice.
Not only is displacement motivated by many factors, but
these factors are embedded in the complex, layered stories of
peoples’ lives. This study supports what previous research has
shown, which is that tenants often describe moves in a way that
highlights their own control over their housing situation.17
For example, a respondent may at first report that she has
never been displaced or evicted or that she chose to move.
However, the same respondent may later share that her
landlord was harassing her for many months and threatening
to evict her, eventually creating a hostile living situation
that forced her to leave. While she was not evicted, she
was displaced. Respondents’ stories of displacement, their
search for housing, and their current living situations reflect
an effort to preserve and exercise control over their lives despite
the imbalance of power between landlords and tenants
and the profoundly exclusive, polarized housing and labor
markets of the Bay Area.
UC Berkeley researchers surveyed two groups of households,
both of whom had received services at Community
Legal Services in East Palo Alto (CLSEPA). The first group
(n=58) were displaced from their home in the last two years.18
These clients are hereafter referred to as having been displaced.
The second group, which serves as a comparison
group, included clients who either did not move in the last
two years or moved by their own choice (n=42). These respondents
are referred to as households who were not displaced.
CLSEPA staff connected the UC Berkeley research
team to potential survey participants. The research team
then surveyed individuals who agreed to participate. This
brief compares the experiences of displaced households
to the experiences of households who were not displaced
as well as displaced households before and after they were
displaced. Only findings that were statistically significant
(p<0.05) were included in this brief.19
A. The Stories behind Displacement
While the primary goal of this study was to assess the
impacts of displacement, it painted an important picture of
the complex, interconnected factors that lead to displacement.

The survey data illustrate household and landlord dynamics
that play out against the backdrop of structural inequalities
that characterize urban America. Cities across the country,
especially in the Bay Area, are facing constrained, expensive
housing markets paired with rising income inequality.20
For low-wage workers, incomes are simply not keeping up
with housing prices.21 Without limits on annual rent in-
IGS Research Brief, May 2017 4 Displacement in San Mateo County, California 5
creases, many tenants find themselves unable to pay rising
housing costs. In the midst of this housing squeeze, middleand
high-income households are seeking more affordable
housing in neighborhoods with traditionally lower rents
and proximity to jobs and transportation. These forces often
result in even greater housing demand, higher rents, and
incentives for landlords to bring new, higher paying tenants
into their properties.
KEY FINDING 1. Tenants report that,
aside from being formally evicted,
they were harassed out by landlords,
priced out by market forces,
and pushed out by poor housing
conditions.
Property sales, landlord
move-ins, and renovations were
common causes of tenant displacement.
About one in five displaced
respondents cited the sale of
their rental as a primary motivation
behind their eviction. One respondent
described being displaced
from his home in Menlo Park, “The
landlord got an unsolicited offer.
They offered him so much money
he had to sell it. And he couldn’t get
paid until I got out.” Several respondents shared that their
landlords evicted them to complete renovations. While respondents
generally agreed that these renovations were necessary,
they lamented that they were displaced in the process.
As one respondent explained, “There were problems with the
plumbing; mold was an issue in the kitchen and dining room
area. The landlord wanted to fix it [. . . ]. He did not give my
family the option to come back after it was done.” This respondent
and his wife lived in their car for three months after
they were evicted. Still other tenants expressed skepticism
about whether their landlords intended to follow through
on selling or remodeling, or if they were using it as an excuse
to force out current tenants.
Deferred maintenance and pests played an important
role in respondents’ displacement stories. Many
low-income tenants face extremely poor-quality housing,22
and survey respondents in this study were no different.
When asked about the conditions of the housing they were
displaced from, one in three respondents reported pests
(e.g., cockroaches, rats, etc.), one in three reported mold,
and one in four reported broken appliances. Poor-quality
housing conditions have serious implications for health. For
example, pests, mold, and other allergens promote the development
and exacerbation of asthma, disproportionately
impacting low-income households and households of color
who tend to live in older, poorly maintained housing stock.23
Several displaced respondents described an eviction
prompted by their raising a maintenance or pest issue with
their landlord, despite state law prohibiting such retaliation.24,
25 For example, one respondent who was displaced
from Redwood City asked the landlord to change his carpet,
which was in poor condition. He wanted the landlord
to pay for the new carpet, but the landlord refused. Then,
the respondent told the landlord that he
would pay out of pocket for the carpet,
but the landlord said he did not want to
rent to him anymore. He sent him an
eviction notice. Similarly, another respondent
started to have problems with
her landlord in Menlo Park when she
complained about cockroaches. After
that, the landlord told her to move out
of her apartment.
One in seven displaced respondents
reported that some type of landlord
harassment or discrimination
contributed to their displacement.
Respondents described many different
types of harassment that they felt
were intended to push them out of their
home, including verbal harassment and
threats, tampering with cars or utilities, and withholding
maintenance. One respondent who was previously working
as a security guard for Facebook shared,“I had to get to work,
[and the landlord] told me I was in the wrong parking space.
[ . . . ] My landlord towed my car so I couldn’t get to work.”
His commute was a 10-minute drive from his home in East
Palo Alto but close to 40 minutes by bus. Respondents also
reported that discrimination played a role in their displacement,
noting perceived discrimination by race and physical
ability, as well as for using Section 8 housing vouchers.
This type of discrimination, except for the use of vouchers,
is prohibited by federal and state law.26
Whether they were displaced or not, most respondents
were struggling financially. Both rent increases and
late rental payments were common. The housing cost burden
of respondents is not surprising, given that surveyed
households were generally very low-income, with a median
household income of $25,480, compared to the countywide
median of $101,272. In fact, 87 percent of all low- and moderate-income
renters in San Mateo County are housing burdened,
meaning they spend over 30 percent of their income
on rent.27 Households facing this financial burden often
must forego other crucial household needs such as healthy
food, healthcare and medications, or childcare.28, 29
“Then [my landlord] started
saying he didn’t want to
accept Section 8 anymore.
He wanted to bring in new
kinds of people. He asked me
to move. He left a note on the
door. He said it wasn’t working
out. [ . . . He] said, ‘I’m going
in a different direction.’ I tried
to fight him on it, [but there
are] no tenant protections
in San Mateo [County].”
4 IGS Research Brief, May 2017 5 Displacement in San Mateo County, California
Many respondents described multiple factors that contributed
to their displacement, including issues of payment.
Forty percent of displaced respondents reported that an
untenable rent increase was a factor in their displacement,
and 30 percent said that a late or missed rent payment was a
factor. For example, one respondent was
evicted along with her husband and son
because they were unable keep up with
the rent after she and her husband lost
shifts at work. Losing these shifts meant
a $3,500 loss in income. That is when
“todo se descontroló” (everything was out
of control), and they could not keep up
with payments. In addition, several respondents
shared that they were forced
to leave their residence because longtime
or new landlords were no longer willing
to fulfill longstanding, informal arrangements for paying
rent, such as flexible payment schedules or paying in installments.

B. Difficult Tradeoffs to Secure Housing
The difficulties of securing housing in the midst of the
region’s housing crisis are well documented.30 Within this
unaffordable housing market, low-income households, like
many of the study respondents, face a desperation and urgency
in their search for housing. As one respondent explained,
“The rents are so high everywhere; there’s just nowhere
to go.”
KEY FINDING 2. After being displaced, survey respondents
were forced to make difficult and precarious tradeoffs when
searching for housing (e.g., substandard housing conditions,
crowding, moving far away, etc.), limited by both market
forces and exclusionary practices.
Households that had been displaced cite desperation
and limited choices as the primary reasons for their current
housing situation. Compared to respondents who had
not been displaced in the last two years,31 displaced respondents
were significantly more likely to have selected their
current housing because it was the only available
place they could find (74 percent) and/or
because they had no other option (60 percent)
(Exhibit 1). As one respondent who moved
from the city of San Mateo to East Palo Alto
explained, “I moved where I’m living now because
it was the only place I found.” In contrast,
households who had not been displaced were
significantly more likely to cite affordability (74
percent) and access to transit (62 percent) as
reasons they selected their current residence.
These motivations suggest a more substantial
degree of control and freedom of choice for households who
were not displaced. This difference in choice may be related
to many factors, including the urgency around finding
housing following a displacement, the presence of an eviction
on a household’s rental history, or a more recent move,
given that prices have continued to increase dramatically in
the region.
Respondents described that, in order to secure housing
in their same neighborhood or school district, or
anywhere, they were forced to make difficult tradeoffs,
including tolerating crowded and poor housing conditions.
Crowding was a common problem for households.
Respondents shared that the lower rents of a smaller apartment
meant limited privacy and strains on relationships
with family and friends with whom they were sharing a
home. Studies have shown that crowding can negatively
impact mental health and increase the risk of exposure to
respiratory and other infectious diseases.32 In addition, researchers
have found that children in crowded housing have
“Lo que gana
no es suficiente
para rentar.”
“With what you
earn, it’s not enough
to pay the rent.”
EXHIBIT 1. Displaced respondents were significantly more likely to select their current housing because it was the only available place they found and because
they had no other options.
IGS Research Brief, May 2017 6 Displacement in San Mateo County, California 7
lower educational achievement and greater incidence of behavioral
problems.33 Displaced households who could stay
in their neighborhood (i.e., moved within one mile of their
previous residence) lived in significantly more crowded
conditions than displaced households who moved further
away, averaging 2.9 people per bedroom compared to 1.9
people per bedroom. This disparity reflects the tradeoffs
households were forced to make. One respondent in East
Palo Alto articulated this tradeoff, saying, “I love my neighborhood,
even with this rise of multiple people living in one
house. [ . . . Here you can] get out and talk to each person.”
Similarly, respondents described tolerating poor housing
conditions and unresponsive management because their
home was more affordable or in a preferable
location than other available
housing options. These stories support
previous research, which has shown
that when housing costs are very high,
low-income households may accept
older or poorly maintained housing.
These homes are more likely to contain
lead, mold, or pests, which can trigger
asthma, as well as dangerous appliances
and fixtures that can lead to falls and
burns.34es.”
Several respondents shared that
their family had to split up to find
housing after they were displaced. For
example, after being displaced from
their home, one respondent moved two
hours away to a town in California’s
Central Valley, while her partner continued
to live in his office during the
week, visiting her on the weekends. For another respondent,
the distance was even further. After their eviction, she and
most of her family moved out of state, but her eldest son
stayed in California. “The move was difficult because [we]
all want to be together in California,” she shared. Even for
families that were not forced to split up, when asked where
they would go if they had to leave their current home, many
respondents said their family would likely need to split up.
Practices of exclusion and discrimination exacerbated
housing tradeoffs. Respondents cited a lack of credit
as a primary barrier to securing housing, limiting their options.
One respondent who was displaced from his home in
Redwood City but was able to find another house nearby
explained, “The landlord refuses to fix our apartment, but
this was the only place where they did not ask for too much
documentation. The other, nicer places needed recommendations
and credit.” Another respondent explained that he had
to find housing in Modesto, a Central Valley town, because,
“all the places around the Bay Area required a credit check,”
which he couldn’t provide. Respondents also cited discrimination
when they tried to apply for housing with a Section
8 voucher or if they had children. One respondent shared,
“No one would rent to me. If it wasn’t for income not making
three times the rent it was the hours I worked. I didn’t comply
with what they expected of residents. I’m a single mother with
young children.”
C. Homelessness and Marginal Housing
Homelessness and other precarious living situations
were often part of the stories told by displaced survey respondents.
For this study, a respondent
was considered homeless if they selfreported
living in a shelter, in an abandoned
house, on the streets, or said
they were “homeless.” A respondent
was considered marginally housed if
they self-reported living in a motel or
hotel, renting a garage, or living with
family or friends without independent
space.35Research has shown that homeless
individuals are at greater risk for
stress, communicable diseases (e.g., tuberculosis,
respiratory infections, etc.),
malnutrition, violence, and harmful
weather exposure. Being homeless
also makes it more challenging to
treat common conditions such as high
blood pressure, diabetes, and asthma.36
Marginal housing can pose many of the
same health risks and additional health
concerns associated with crowding, depending
on the housing arrangement.
KEY FINDING 3. Approximately one in three displaced households
reported some period of homelessness or marginal
housing in the last two years following their displacement.
Several of these households remained homeless even months
after they were displaced.
Respondents who had been displaced were significantly
more likely to be currently homeless or marginally
housed compared to those who were not displaced.
Of displaced respondents, 12 percent were currently homeless
and 10 percent were marginally housed. In comparison,
only two percent of households that had not been displaced
were currently homeless and none were marginally housed
(Exhibit 2). Most respondents who were currently “doubling
up” with family or friends (considered marginal housing)
did not anticipate being able to find a different housing arrangement
any time soon.
“I’m making that sacrifice
to be close to my family, to
have those great doctors.
I know that I’m going to
have to make a hard choice
very soon. Basically, moving
away from my home, the
place where I grew up,
so that I can support my
family solely on my own.
Without me taking my
kids away from my uncles,
aunts, grandmother,
teachers, schoolmates.”
6 IGS Research Brief, May 2017 7 Displacement in San Mateo County, California
Latinx households who had been displaced were significantly
less likely to be homeless but more likely to
be marginally housed and living in crowded conditions.
Of displaced Latinx respondents, only three percent were
homeless. However, Latinx households were significantly
more likely than other survey respondents to be marginally
housed and living in crowded conditions.
Respondents experiencing homelessness described
feeling insecure, unsafe, and burdened by the effort required
to meet their basic needs. One respondent living
in his car in San Bruno shared, “Where I’m at [in my car], I
can’t stay here forever. Police have been by. I’m sure the people
in this neighborhood don’t appreciate having someone living
on the street.” Another respondent who was evicted twice
before being forced to live in his car described his daily routine;
“[I] get up at 4:30 in the morning, sponge bath off at
the gas station, get cleaned up and shave. Nobody knows I’m
homeless. I try and act like I’m a normal person.”
One in three displaced respondents experienced
some period of homelessness or marginal housing following
their displacement. Only two percent of respondents
who had not been displaced had been homeless and/
or marginally housed at any point in the last two years. In
significant contrast, 33 percent of displaced respondents
had experienced at least one period of homelessness or
marginal housing in the last two years (Exhibit 3). Many of
these respondents anticipated that these periods would be
temporary, but they often spent weeks or months without
finding new housing. Several respondents lived for months
in hotels or motels while they searched for housing. One
respondent described her family’s search for housing after
being displaced from their home in Daly City, “During that
time we moved away, we were staying at hotels every day [. . .]
for eight months.”
Respondents described the ways in which the instability
and costs associated with these periods of homelessness
or marginal housing had ripple effects that impacted
many different aspects of their lives. After being displaced
from her home in Daly City, one respondent who works at
San Francisco International Airport explained, “I was frustrated.
Homeless at the time, all I cared about was somewhere
to sleep and take a shower and go to work. I didn’t want to
lose my job and be completely homeless.” Another respondent
and her family lived in motels for four months following her
displacement, and she ended up using most of her savings.
EXHIBIT 2. Displaced respondents were more likely to be homeless or marginally housed.
EXHIBIT 3. Displaced respondents were more likely to have been homeless and/or marginally housed at least once in the past two years.
IGS Research Brief, May 2017 8 Displacement in San Mateo County, California 9
After her daughter left for college, the respondent went to
live at a shelter. However, her daughter subsequently left college
to work and support the family financially.
D. Where Do Households Move?
Much of the existing research on displacement in the
Bay Area relies on secondary data, which illustrates dramatic
demographic changes throughout the region, including
increases in people of color, low-income, and renters in the
Robin’s Story
Robin and her husband were evicted from their home.
She has a disability and currently uses a wheelchair.
Robin’s landlord told her she needed to leave because
the landlord wanted to move into her room. Since she
was displaced in 2014, Robin and her husband have
been staying with their adult son in his 1-bedroom
apartment and contributing $200 a month towards the
rent.
“I had two choices, my son’s place or the street.”
“If my son had his own room, he’d have a little
bit of privacy. We’re all in the same room with
him. He can’t have his life, he told me, ‘You took
my life.’ I’m trying really hard to get my own
place so we can live in peace.”
Robin seemed pessimistic about their ability to find
other housing.
“It’s impossible to get a place. I’ve been trying
for two years to get a place. Now the rent is
raised so high, I don’t know how we’re going to
do it [ . . .]. He [Robin’s husband] can’t get a job,
because he has to take care of me.”
outer areas of the region.37 Patterns of displacement and mobility
can be inferred from these analyses. However, there
is very little data available that follows specific households
as they move from one neighborhood or county to another.
This study allows for this household-level analysis.
KEY FINDING 4.After being displaced, only 21 percent of households
reported staying in the same neighborhood (within 1
mile of their previous home) (Exhibit 4). Thirty-three percent
of households left San Mateo County, generally moving
to the Central Valley or eastern communities in the East Bay
(Exhibit 5).
E. New Communities, New Challenges
Most households who can secure new housing after being
displaced find their new home in a new neighborhood,
city, or even region. These new neighborhoods can be very
different than a household’s previous neighborhood, especially
for the one in three displaced households who no longer
live in San Mateo County. While these neighborhoods
offer more affordable housing opportunities on average,
they lack other types of opportunities and supports.
KEY FINDING 5. After being displaced, households moved to
neighborhoods with fewer job opportunities on average,
leading to longer, more costly commutes for households
who left the county. These new neighborhoods also had
more environmental and safety concerns as well as fewer
healthcare resources.
Displaced households found new homes in communities
with more affordable housing but less economic opportunity.
This often translated to longer and more costly
commutes. Households who were displaced currently live
in neighborhoods with more affordable housing but access
to fewer jobs, scoring over 10 points lower on the HUD Job
Access index (on a 100-point scale) than the neighborhoods
of households who were not displaced.38 While the change
in commute time for displaced respondents who found new
EXHIBIT 4. Only 1 in 5 displaced respondents live in the same neighborhood (within 1 mile) as before they were displaced. One in four are currently living over 25
miles from their original neighborhood.
8 IGS Research Brief, May 2017 9 Displacement in San Mateo County, California
EXHIBIT 5. Most displaced households who left San Mateo County moved to the Central Valley (e.g., San Joaquin, Merced, and Stanislaus counties) or eastern
communities in the East Bay (e.g., Vallejo, Pittsburg, Hayward).
IGS Research Brief, May 2017 10 Displacement in San Mateo County, California 11
housing elsewhere in San Mateo County was negligible, the
one-third of displaced workers who moved outside of the
county saw their commute time increase significantly by an
average of 47 minutes. Prior research has associated longer
commutes with lower rates of physical activity and lower
cardio-respiratory fitness as well as higher stress and blood
pressure.39 Similarly, average commute cost for displaced respondents
who stayed in San Mateo County was negligible;
however, respondents who left the county reported an average
increase in commute cost of $390 per month (Exhibit 6).
Compared to displaced respondents who found new housing
within San Mateo County, displaced respondents who
left the county were also less likely to live within a 10-minute
walk of public transportation.
Respondents shared how moving far away negatively
impacted their employment and commute. As one respondent
who currently works as an Uber driver described, “I’m
finding it really hard to get a job or to keep a job out here in
Merced. They’ll hire you, they’ll give you anywhere from 10-
12 hours a week. But it’s really hard income-wise. What I’m
doing right now is I have to actually come to the Bay Area
and work here and come back to Merced. It’s highly likely that
we’ll have to move closer.” Another respondent who moved
to Stockton still works in Richmond, but now she commutes
two hours each way.
Respondents who were displaced felt significantly less
safe in their new neighborhood, but perceptions of
safety varied depending on where respondents moved.
When asked about perceived safety in their neighborhood,
displaced respondents were more likely to report feeling
safer in the neighborhood from which they were displaced
than their current neighborhood. Many respondents who
lived in or near their original neighborhoods in San Mateo
County shared that their neighborhood was not safe, but
they did not expect to move to another neighborhood. As
one respondent living in East Palo Alto explained, “I feel
very safe [in my neighborhood], but it’s not a safe neighborhood.”
Safety concerns were especially salient for women
who described feeling limited in where and when they
could go out in their neighborhood, especially at night.
EXHIBIT 6. Displaced respondents who moved outside of San Mateo County saw significant increases in commute cost and time.
EXHIBIT 7. Households who had been displaced currently live in neighborhoods with significantly fewer healthcare facilities available for its residents
10 IGS Research Brief, May 2017 11 Displacement in San Mateo County, California
Access to healthcare services was diminished for displaced
households, especially for those who had to leave
San Mateo County to find housing. Compared to households
who were not displaced, displaced households lived
in neighborhoods with significantly fewer healthcare facilities.
Displaced households lived in neighborhoods with an
average of 1.77 healthcare facilities per 1,000 people within
five miles. In comparison, households who were not displaced
lived in neighborhoods with 2.54 facilities per 1,000
people within five miles (Exhibit 7).40 Among displaced
respondents, those who stayed in San Mateo County were
significantly more likely to report having a medical home41
(88 percent), compared to households who moved outside
of the county (56 percent). Having a medical home is associated
with improved quality of care and patient experiences
as well as reductions in hospital and emergency department
visits, which are often expensive.42 In addition, respondents
with chronic health issues shared that the move and distance
created challenges in accessing healthcare services. As one
respondent explained, “[Now] I have to change buses to go to
my [doctor] appointment. Sometimes I miss my appointments
because I don’t have the money [for the bus ticket].”
In addition to a lack of healthcare faculties, the new
neighborhoods of displaced households had more environmental
and health risks on average than their previous
neighborhoods. For respondents who were displaced,
their new neighborhoods have significantly poorer air quality
(i.e., concentrations of ozone and particulate matter),43
which may increase the risk of displaced respondents to develop
adverse health conditions such as heart disease, cancer,
and respiratory illness. In fact, their new neighborhoods
have significantly higher incidences of cardiovascular disease
compared to their previous neighborhoods.44
F. The Trauma and Disruption of
Displacement for Adults and Children
While displacement is tied to many material consequences,
it is also linked with more personal and psychological
disruptions. Previous research has shown that people
experiencing housing insecurity are almost three times more
likely to be in frequent mental distress than those who have
secure housing.45Research has also shown that evictions are
associated with increased risks of depression and stress that
can have impacts for years following the eviction.46 Survey
respondents shared that their children also suffer from the
disruption of displacement in school and peer networks as
well as the reverberations from family stress and trauma.
KEY FINDING 6. Displacement was a significant disruption and
trauma for respondents and their children. Two out of three
children in displaced households had to change schools.
Respondents shared how being displaced was a significant
trauma and source of stress for them and their
children. Survey respondents described how the shock and
stress of their displacement impacted their health and wellbeing,
both during the displacement process and well into
the future. One respondent who was displaced and eventually
moved out of state explained, “It was like a sock in the
stomach, it took my breath away. I cannot get over this. Every
single day has been a black day for me. I just cannot get over
it. [ . . . ] I am struggling.” Another respondent who lived in
his Redwood City home for 19 years said the move represented
“un daño psicológico muy grande” (a great psychological
harm). Respondents also described how their own stress
impacted their children. “[Our displacement] was very difficult,”
one respondent said, “One week I did not eat. I cried a
lot. I stressed; my daughter is also with me. [ . . . ] It lingers. A
lot of sadness and a lot of stress.”
Respondents also shared how displacement caused
disruption and trauma for their children and their education.
About two-thirds of children (64 percent) in displaced
households had to change schools. One in five children had
to change schools mid-year (Exhibit 8). About two-thirds of
parents (61 percent) said that changing schools negatively
affected their child’s academic performance. For example,
a respondent explained that the move to Stockton had affected
his children both academically and emotionally, but
that they were slowly getting “back on track.” Another respondent
said her main concern following their move to
Richmond was that her two children had to change schools,
which they did not like. These findings can be considered
in the context of the broader literature, which has shown
that children in displaced households have more absences, a
lower likelihood of finishing school, and a greater risk of educational
delays or behavior problems.47 Changing schools
may also mean disconnection from other place-based social
services or resources within a school or district.
Conclusions
This study supports the existing literature on the impacts
of housing instability and evictions as well as the geographic
transformation of race and class underway in the
San Francisco Bay Area. Adding to existing research, this
study provides nuanced, personal insights into the experiences
of individuals and families striving to determine their
own future within one of the most constrained and polarized
housing and labor markets in the country. While this
study reflects only a small sample of respondents, the findings
offer an important window into these household experiences.
Capitalizing on the inherent power imbalance between
landlords and tenants, these market conditions allow
illegal landlord practices to flourish, such as discrimination
IGS Research Brief, May 2017 12 Displacement in San Mateo County, California 13
and retaliation for maintenance requests, and have led to an
increase in landlord practices that are legal in most cities
in San Mateo County, such as no-cause evictions where the
tenant is not at fault. These practices have serious implications
for household stability and health.
Displaced households faced a dangerous combination of
limited opportunity and urgency in their search for housing,
forcing them to make compromises that could be personally
painful, socioeconomically limiting, and detrimental
to their health. Forced to move away from their neighborhoods,
households faced longer, more costly commutes and
reduced access to public transit. This can mean more sedentary
time commuting and less physical activity and time
with families. Forced to pay more for housing, families are
more likely to forego other household expenses like food,
medications, or childcare. And when forced to accept poor
housing conditions, such as overcrowding, mold, or pests,
households are at greater risk of asthma, respiratory illness,
communicable diseases, and stress. Homelessness and marginal
housing, often considered fringe experiences, were
startlingly common among displaced households. These living
conditions compromised households’ safety, social networks,
and health. Displacement itself is deeply traumatic,
compromising the mental health of households both immediately
and for months or years after a family is forced
to move. Finally, children bear the impacts of displacement
through disruption in both their home and educational environments.

This study represents a modest first attempt to document
the individual experiences of displaced households.
Certainly, further research is needed to examine the experiences,
causes, and consequences of displacement. This work
should be expanded to different cities, counties, and regions.
Even more urgent, however, is a need to implement policies
and strategies to prevent displacement. Displacement is a
national problem, a regional phenomenon, and a community
experience. We must similarly seek to identify, evaluate,
and enact policy change at all levels.

---

A community in flux: Will Boyle Heights be ruined by one coffee shop?

As dusk settled over a mostly industrial landscape of warehouses covered with graffiti murals, Fernando Ramirez stood in front of the lone art gallery late Saturday afternoon and urged fashionably dressed visitors not to go inside.

"Don't contribute to the displacement of the people in the community right here in Boyle Heights. Our rents are going up because of the art galleries," he said. "Please do not cross the picket line!"


inRead invented by Teads

ADVERTISEMENT
Ramirez, 38, had come to this desolate stretch of Boyle Heights with other protesters to once again declare war against a growing number of neighborhood art galleries and what he and other activists fear they foreshadow: a wave of gentrification.

On Sunday, a few miles east, a smaller group of protesters gathered outside a white storefront on Cesar Chavez Avenue with the word "COFFEE" painted in black.

PAID POST
What's This?

Why Schwab's satisfaction guarantee leads the industry
A message from Charles Schwab

Schwab offers a Satisfaction Guarantee, where if for any reason you're not happy, we'll refund your eligible fee or commission.

SEE MORE
Months after the activists won an apparent victory by pressuring an art gallery to close down amid what the owners called "constant attacks," the protests against the galleries — and now Weird Wave Coffee — have illustrated both the demonstrators' knack for annoying their targets as well as the limits of their tactics.

Along the gray desolation of Anderson Street, they have contended with sometimes well-financed galleries that can largely weather the disruptions. And on the busy stretch of Boyle Heights that houses Weird Wave Coffee, they have confronted residents who don't take kindly to being told what to do or buy.


L.A. NOW
Vandal targets coffee shop at center of anti-gentrification protests in Boyle Heights
JUL 19, 2017 | 10:55 AM
Anti-gentrification forces spent weeks trolling the coffee house on Instagram before and after it opened June 15. They held protest rallies outside the business, holding posters, including one that read "… White Coffee" and included an expletive, and another that said "AmeriKKKano to go." They passed out fliers with a parody logo that read "White Wave."

Some Latino residents who defended Weird Wave Coffee said they were called "coconuts" by activists. Brown on the outside, white on the inside.

"It makes us look bad," Koda Torres said of the confrontational tactics used against the cafe. "The way they handle the situation of gentrification wasn't appropriate. They were almost vandalizing their windows, harassing the customers, calling people sellouts and racists."

But for the protesters, the stakes are too high for niceties. As they see it, if Boyle Heights is taken over by the forces of gentrification, then no other neighborhood is safe.

"It's a threat to local businesses and it's one more sign of gentrification that we need to defeat," Leonardo Vilchis, director of Union de Vecinos, said of Weird Wave Coffee. "Otherwise this neighborhood is going to end up just like Highland Park."

Early on in the battle against the galleries, protesters stormed into shows and threw detergent on patrons as well as the food they were being served, according to witnesses and news reports. The Los Angeles Police Department investigated the graffiti of one gallery that included an expletive and said "… White Art."

The Eastside has long been a center of Los Angeles' protest movements, whether it was residents marching against the Vietnam War in the 1970s or more recently demonstrating for immigrant rights.

But the activists who have fought against gentrification have so far failed to rally a large number of residents to their cause.

Some longtime residents like the rising property values and increased retail choices. Others are concerned about people being pushed out of the neighborhood. They also struggle to connect the dots, like the activists, between widespread gentrification and a cafe or art galleries in an isolated part of Boyle Heights.

I don’t know the word ‘gentrification.' I know the word ‘displacement.’

 NANCY GARCIA, BOYLE HEIGHTS RESIDENT
Share quote & link

"I don't know the word 'gentrification,'" said Nancy Garcia, 31, a Boyle Heights resident. "I know the word 'displacement.'"

About 100 people, including Garcia, showed up at a separate rally activists organized last month at Mariachi Plaza to support mariachis and other tenants facing eviction from homes that will be converted into luxury apartments. The atmosphere was spirited but peaceful, with musicians playing in the background.

Leonardo Vilchis Sr., left, hands out fliers to the community boycotting Weird Wave Coffee in Boyle Heights.
Leonardo Vilchis Sr., left, hands out fliers to the community boycotting Weird Wave Coffee in Boyle Heights. (Gary Coronado / Los Angeles Times)

When the owners of Weird Wave Coffee decided to open their shop in Boyle Heights, they were aware of the movement against gentrification. But they did not think they would be targeted like the art galleries. They were selling coffee, not pricey paintings.

Also, Weird Wave was hardly the first cafe or trendy business in Boyle Heights.

The arrival of the Metro Gold Line nearly eight years ago paved the way for change, along with rising property values and the boom of downtown L.A.

Not far from 1st Street and Boyle Avenue, Eastside Luv, a popular wine bar, opened years ago. Across Mariachi Plaza, a Victorian-era building, once home to many mariachis, went through extensive restoration and served as affordable housing. In 2014, La Monarca Bakery, an upscale Mexican cafe and panaderia, opened in the building's ground floor.

"I thought maybe we're OK now," said Mario Chavarria, co-owner of Weird Wave Coffee. "It was a year ago, and you know people's perceptions change. But when they started posting notes on the window, I thought, well, maybe not quite."

Initially, protesters thought they were protesting against two owners, Jackson Defa and John Schwarz, who are white.

Defa, 34, a San Francisco native, said he tried to extend an olive branch to the protesters when they showed up at the business, but was rejected. Defa may have made things more difficult when he snapped an Instagram photo of a fruit vendor and used the hashtag "local yokel," a phrase used to describe someone living in a rural area. Defa removed the post, apologized for the remark and said he was actually making fun of himself, not the vendor, whom they sometimes purchase fruit from.

But protesters point to the incident as an example of how outsiders actually feel about the community.

Defa said he understands the protesters' concerns and probably would have supported them. He said that in San Francisco, he saw his rent jump from $700 to $2,000 in a year because of gentrification and moved to L.A. for a new start. He worked at a coffee shop in West L.A. until the owner sold it.

Schwarz, 33, a video game developer, lost his job last June. He held a few jobs to make a living and rents a room for $700 in the West Adams area.

"I wasn't surprised," Defa said of the protesters. "I was surprised they didn't want to listen."

Chavarria, who came to the U.S. from El Salvador when he was 10, put up $100,000 of his own money to open the business. When the activists began protesting, after Defa couldn't get the group to listen, Chavarria was called in to speak to the protesters, hoping they would see that the business was not just owned by two white guys. A resident even placed a sign in the shop's window pointing out that it was a Latino-owned business.

"So I went out there and said, 'What's going on? What seems to be the problem?' And they said, 'These guys in there are trying to change the community,'" Chavarria recalled. "And I said, well, I don't think we're doing that. I'm part of the business. This is my place and I think, as a Hispanic, you're willing to support someone like you who is trying to get ahead, using his own private money.'"

Chavarria said he was called a vendido — sellout.

John Schwarz, center, and Jackson Defa, right, serve customers at Weird Wave Coffee.
John Schwarz, center, and Jackson Defa, right, serve customers at Weird Wave Coffee. (Gary Coronado / Los Angeles Times)

Critics like Vilchis say the shop's minimalist aesthetics and hipster style represent a danger to the community, encouraging property owners to increase rents and eventually price out longtime tenants.

But though Vilchis and other activists oppose some businesses, they also admit they can be selective in their opposition.

They don't protest a Starbucks in Boyle Heights, for instance, because it's a "post-gentrification" business that no longer poses a threat, Vilchis said.

He said his problem isn't with the products that businesses like the galleries or Weird Wave Coffee sell.

"It doesn't matter how good of a cup of coffee it is, it doesn't matter the good intentions the owners of the business have," he said. "It's about the effect that the coffee shop has on the local neighborhood. It's not about taste, it's about effect."

A day after Weird Wave Coffee opened in mid-June, the protesters' confrontational tactics got the attention of the media, but the coverage only made others in the area curious about the cafe. Some residents and business owners also found themselves targets.

"I really couldn't believe people are that mean in our neighborhood," said Francisco Torres, 47, a longtime resident. "I didn't like that."

Weird Wave Coffee is located in the 2400 block of East Cesar Chavez Avenue.
Weird Wave Coffee is located in the 2400 block of East Cesar Chavez Avenue. (Gary Coronado / Los Angeles Times)

Protesters gathered outside the shop, live-streaming the event and recording themselves as they paced back and forth, holding signs. But they also recorded telling interactions between residents and protesters.

In one recording, Ashley Aragonez, 29, expresses annoyance with the anti-gentrification activists.

"What are you gonna get out of this? Do you think they're going to close down?" she told a protester.

"That's our mission — for them to get out of the neighborhood," he said.

Another protester, a woman, chimed in: "What do you want? Do you want a white coffee shop here?"

"I want to be able to come and drink coffee and not have people yelling at me," Aragonez said.

"That's not gonna happen," the young man replied.

On Saturday night, visitors to two galleries targeted by activists largely went about their business. Some walked around, looking at art and holding cans of beer, at times getting into debates with protesters.

Lorraine Molina, 46, of Eagle Rock told a protester she owned a gallery downtown before rising rents forced her out.

"I think they're naive and I think they're militant and they're so ill-informed, they only understand what they're interested in," she said. "That's the problem. The dialogue isn't big enough, it isn't expansive enough and inclusive enough."

---

HOW TO BE A LESS SHITTY GENTRIFIER
A Toolkit for People Hell Bent on Being New Renters in the SF Bay Area




This Image is of a homeless encampment in Lafayette Square Park in Downtown Oakland. A crane and steel structure in the background show where a new development is being constructed.


This document is for you if you are planning to be a new renter in the SF Bay Area and you have race and/or class privilege, or recently became one. This document is for you if you are moving by choice, and have the means to support yourself in the Bay. Maybe you are moving for a job, or for school. Maybe you’re escaping a hellish situation and you hope here will be less hellish. Maybe you grew up here, but you’re ready to live on your own. You know that there’s a housing crisis. You understand that your moving will exacerbate an already dire situation. This is not a “how to move to the bay” guide, but a “so you’re moving to the bay, nothing will stop you, here are some tips on how to be a less shitty gentrifier.”


I am a wealthy white person who moved to Berkeley by choice in 2014. This document is the sum total of what I’ve learned from people of color (queer women esp.), orgs like Causa Justa Just Cause, born and raised bay area folks, and the internet. Here you will find information on how the housing crisis came to be, and how to play your part to fight back against the rampant forces that are, and have been, killing or forcing out black, brown, and indigenous residents of Ohlone Land/ the San Francisco Bay Area since 1542.

A Definition of the Bay Area
“Locally, many of the regional governmental agencies and districts recognize the nine counties that border the San Francisco, San Pablo, and Suisun estuaries as part of the Bay Area: Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, Napa, San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Solano, and Sonoma counties.
  Among locals, the nine-county Bay Area can be further divided into five sub-regions: the East Bay, North Bay, South Bay, Peninsula, and the city of San Francisco. Although geographically located on the tip of the San Francisco Peninsula, the city of San Francisco is not considered part of the "Peninsula" subregion, but as a separate entity.”


A Definition of Gentrification
“We define gentrification as a profit-driven racial and class reconfiguration of urban, working-class and communities of color that have suffered from a history of disinvestment and abandonment.


The process is characterized by declines in the number of low-income, people of color in neighborhoods that begin to cater to higher-income workers willing to pay higher rents. Gentrification is driven by private developers, landlords, businesses, and corporations, and supported by the government through policies that facilitate the process of displacement, often in the form of public subsidies.


Gentrification happens in areas where commercial and residential land is cheap, relative to other areas in the city and region, and where the potential to turn a profit either through repurposing existing structures or building new ones is great.”


* P. 8, Development without Displacement, Causa Justa Just Cause


________________
Concrete Action Steps
Don’t Move Here
The first concrete thing you can do to keep from exacerbating the displacement and gentrification in the Bay Area is to not move here (or Detroit, or New Orleans, or Brooklyn, or anywhere else where similar trends are taking place). If there’s something you’re looking for in the Bay, can you find it or make it where you are now? (That’s a real question, not a leading one.) For more thoughts on this, try reading the Bay is Not an Island, geared toward white radical queers, but applicable to others. Or this essay on actually moving home (which not everyone can do, of course.)


I moved here, I have no moral high ground to stand on, I pass no judgment on your decision, it is yours. If you are moving here, keep reading to find some suggestions for ways to reduce the negative impact of your move.


Pay your Shuumi Land Tax
“Do you live in Oakland, Berkeley, Albany, El Cerrito, Richmond, San Pablo, San Leandro, Alameda, Piedmont, Hayward, Union City, Fremont, Pleasanton, Pinole, Livermore, Moraga, Orinda, El Sobrante, Danville, Walnut Creek, Martinez, Pleasant Hill, Benicia or Vallejo?


If the answer is yes, you live on traditional Chochenyo and Karkin Ohlone land. This land has a deep history and a community of people who have lived here for thousands of years. For those of us who are not Indigenous to this land, the Shuumi Land Tax is a way to acknowledge this history and the Ohlone community.


The Shuumi Land Tax directly supports the Sogorea Te Land Trust’s work to acquire and preserve land, establish a cemetery to reinter stolen Ohlone ancestral remains and build a community center and round house so current and future generations of Indigenous people can thrive in the Bay Area.” - Sogorea’ Te Land Trust Website


* http://sogoreate-landtrust.com/shuumi-land-tax/


[re·in·ter /rēinˈtər/ verb - bury (a corpse) again, often in a different place than that of the first burial.]


VOTE TO REPEAL COSTA HAWKINS + Fight Developments + Support Rent Control and Dedicated Affordable Housing
We have more empty houses (more than 17 million) than unhoused people (half a million) in this country. AirBnb takes perfectly good living units off the market. Thousands of units stand empty for no apparently good reason. All this shit makes existing housing more expensive.


It is more important to focus on Rent Control (it exists but not in every city, and the Costa Hawkins Act undermines it) and on getting units off the competitive market & into protected permanent affordable housing. Also 30% of income as affordable isn't affordable if you make minimum wage, or even a decent salary, because everything else is expensive too.


* How to be a housing ally - Medium
* The racial Contours of Yimby/Nimby Bay Area Gentrification - Berkeley Planning Journal
* A single law is devastating the affordability of housing in California. Repeal Costa-Hawkins - LA Times
* YIMBYs Exposed: The Techies Hawking Free Market “Solutions” to the Nation’s Housing Crisis - In These Times
* California rent control measure makes November ballot - Curbed LA
Donate to, Volunteer with, and Support Front Line Organizations
Donate to these organizations, volunteer with them, follow them on social media, and support them in any and all the ways that you can. These are organizations that are founded by and/or center the work, voices, and leadership of the marginalized people they serve.

Don’t Call the Police
Calling the police can be a death sentence for black and brown folks, especially disabled black and brown folks. Don’t do it.


* What to do instead of Calling the Police - a resource guide


#AbolishICE
The entire Bay Area is in what is known as a “Border Zone” - which means anywhere in the United States within 100 miles of a coastline or border.


“In the “border zone,” different legal standards apply. Agents can enter private property, set up highway checkpoints, have wide discretion to stop, question, and detain individuals they suspect to have committed immigration violations—and can even use race and ethnicity as factors to do so."
- Inside the Massive U.S. 'Border Zone' CityLab


* So, do not cooperate with ICE and show up for undocumented housemates, employees, neighbors, and just in general.
* Know your rights and the rights of others at checkpoints or at raids. Check out the California ICE Raids Know Your Rights Info by the ACLU
* We need to Abolish ICE (and the police in general). To learn more read this Facebook Post
* Report ICE activity in SF - http://sfilen.org/ or call (415) 200-1548
* Report ICE Activity in Alameda County - https://centrolegal.org/acilep/ or call 510-241-4011
Get Organized
Find a political home. Find a group of people with whom you can learn and grow and do work. This might be a group of friends, a facebook group, or an existing organization, like one below. (Volunteering for one of the organizations above can be a way of finding a political home.)


* Showing Up for Racial Justice
* Bay Resistance
* Resource Generation


Cosign Leases for Other People
If you know someone who can’t pass a credit check, and you have good credit, cosign their lease so that they can get housing. If someone has a low credit score, or a less than full-time salaried job, or an eviction on their record, this can make getting into new places difficult to impossible. Your good credit score can help them make it happen.


Share Your Resources
Make a good salary at your job? earmark a certain amount to give away every month. Don't just give it away to non profits and orgs, also give directly to people. When unhoused folks ask for cash on the street, have some dollars handy. Support local artists on patreon. Send money to folks' Venmos or paypals when they're short on rent, or bills, or just because.

Have a business and you're hiring? Prioritize hiring POC, low income, disabled queer or trans folks. These are the folks most harmed by gentrification and most in need of income. Do the work to make sure your business is set up to meet the needs of whoever you hire. Check out AORTA if you need resources to do so.

Have a car? Have free time on the weekends? Help folks who have kids, or work 3 jobs, or are disabled run errands, clean their home space, or cook.

Have a particular skill set? Maybe you're a masseuse or a cook, an electrician or an herbalist, a coder or a graphic designer. Offer your services sliding scale, or for free, a few hours a week to low income POC or to one of the orgs linked here.

Whatever you have, share it.


Understand Yours and Others’ Rights
Stand up for your rights to your landlord, so that they stop taking advantage of you and other renters. When you can, pass on accurate and appropriate information to other renters, so that they can stay housed in safe and affordable living spaces, to the degree that it is possible.


Don’t share this information with landlords. Make them at least pay a lawyer to do their dirty work.


Support POC Owned Businesses
Patron black-owned businesses. Patron pre-gentrification businesses. Gentrification puts people out of business. One of the first markers of gentrification in a historically disinvested-in neighborhood is a new white-owned coffee shop or cafe.


* A list of POC owned cafes in Berkeley and Oakland
* Black Owned Businesses in Oakland
________________
On Looking for Housing


Consider your impact when you look for housing. You are only one person, but your decisions and impact still matter.
Where Are You Going to Live?
Do your research on what neighborhood you’re living in. Check out the Maps Section for more.


If you can, avoid living in historically black/low-income/neighborhoods of color. These neighborhoods are usually less expensive and experience the heaviest gentrification. Try to live in neighborhoods that are historically invested in, usually wealthier & whiter, and therefore less harmed by gentrification.


EDIT: I received some push back on this point. The push back suggested that this may result in self-segregation. They also pointed out that “the accumulation of overly highly priced land and overly lowly priced land, through the racial segregation of land and housing pricing and investment, is, economically, one of the structural causes of gentrification, through the speculative exploitation of what Neil Smith called the rent gap.”


My thinking was that by avoiding living in neighborhoods that are being actively gentrified, wealthy and/or white people will not take up space in historically non-white / working class neighborhoods. And we might not take what is a potentially more affordable housing spot away from someone who can’t pay a higher rent.


I think, perhaps, this is a “no ethical consumption under capitalism” sort of situation, meaning, whatever we do we’ll be gentrifiers.


Pay What You Can
Pay what you can for housing. Housing below $1000 a month is rare. If you can afford more, pay more. If you see housing available for less, share it with networks of folks who need cheaper housing. If you know someone offering you housing for less, let them know you want to help them prioritize someone low income for that spot.


Don’t Rent a Property Made Available Through a No Fault Eviction
Many people are evicted because landlords want to raise the rents, not because the tenant did something to warrant eviction. You can check the history of SF properties here.
________________
On Living with Other People


If you live in communal housing / live with other people / live with a sig.other, here are some suggestions for how to have an equitable housing set up.
Pay Rent Based on Income
Work with your housemates to set up a system where folks are paying rent based on income, to the degree possible. (If you make twice as much as your housemate, pay twice as much rent.)


Make Rooms Available for Low Income POC
If you have enough space, make at least one room available for as low rent as possible, and give priority to low income people of color.


Give options for deposits, such as paying a deposit over a period of months.


Do Emotional & Physical labor
If you are white and live with people of color, pay attention to who is doing the labor (emotional, physical, etc.). POC are often defaulted to doing more house/emotional labor. As are women, and queer folks. Do what you can to mitigate this, if you hold privileges your housemates do not (including ability level, wealth, whiteness, or maleness).


Some examples of emotional and physical labor: cook for your housemates when you can, offer to pick up groceries or take them to the store, walk their dog, or clean the common spaces regularly. If you don’t have time, pay someone a living wage ($25-$40/hr) to help keep the house clean. Listen when your housemates vent or talk about what’s going on for them, and hold space for it (don’t talk about yourself). Ask if it’s ok before you unload about what’s going on for you. Be ok with the answer being “no.”


For more on emotional Labor, see this PDF of a reddit thread or this compilation of resources (gathered for queer masculine people, but with many articles that are applicable to other folks)


No Chore Wheels

Don’t do chore wheels, they are ableist.


Talk with your housemates about abilities around different tasks. Anxiety, chronic pain, injuries, or fatigue can make tasks you think are simple (if you are able bodied) very difficult for others. One person taking out the trash once a week might be as much, if not more effort, than another person sweeping the kitchen every day. Talk with one another and make a plan that fits everyone’s schedules and abilities. Don’t make people explain WHY they cannot do a thing, trust that people know their own limits and boundaries.


For more on ableism and how to be in solidarity with disabled folks, see Sins Invalid’s Disability Justice Primer


From a commenter: “Apparently matthew desmond doesn't advocate for rent control policy...? He only highlights universal housing vouchers - which is good - but won’t alleviate what cities are fighting for right now. Also he doesn't credit his data that he gets from lots of small projects doing this work with way smaller budgets than him.”

